Good.
Hello. Hello. Saw you in our health
chair of the group,
the chair of the group.
Well, welcome to the Environment Select Committee this
afternoon to, uh, the annual review
of the Department of Conservation.
Uh, look, just before we start, I would like to, um,
acknowledge our Vanuatu, uh, delegation in the room today.
Uh, uh, honorable John Joseph
and his colleagues welcome, uh,
obviously getting an insight into the New Zealand, uh,
environment Select Committee here today.
So, um, look, you have three hours with us today, um,
and of course, uh, we have the structured agenda
of which I'm sure you have there as well.
Um, uh, we will try to kind of stick to that as much
as we can give a bit of structure
to the process this afternoon.
But of course, uh, there may be other areas that, uh,
members may like to cover as well.
So, look, we'll hand it over to you to,
to make some opening remarks
and, um, then we'll open it up for questions.
Great. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Um, first of all, I'd just like to make sure that all
of you know the team that I've got here
With me, so I'll get the team to introduce themselves.
Uh, good afternoon. Mike Tulley, uh, DDG
for organization support about Henry Wisdom from the
DDG for operations,
D Biodiversity, heritage, and, um, Kia Peter Al.
And DDG for policy. Aston DDG Public Affairs.
Mm-hmm. Smith d DG for treating Relationships.
Your honor, director.
Thank you. And thank you for those introductions.
And feel free as, um, you know, questions come to come forth
to the, to the table here, to the microphones
as well. So thank you.
Fantastic. Look, thank you very much.
Um, I'm Penny Nelson,
director General at Department of Conservation.
Um, I'm going to make a few opening remarks
and thank you so much for sending through an agenda.
It makes it easy to prepare for, to talk about.
We really appreciate that. So, first of all, I'd like
to thank our staff.
Um, I'd like to express my pride in them
for delivering excellent results for nature.
They're passionate, conscientious, flexible, and resilient.
And I want to thank all of them for their hard work.
Over the last year, this year,
doc has celebrated some significant wins.
We've had intensive management of Tara Eati,
new Zealand's Fairy turn,
resulting in a highly successful breeding season.
17 Fealing survived.
And when we only have 28 adult birds,
every chick is precious.
We also created new wild populations
of Takahe in the Reese Valley,
and you'll have seen in the media today.
We are celebrating some chicks of the birds
that were released there.
And in the Greenstone, uh, we've got Kaki Ika on Anka Island
and, uh, teki on RA to Island.
We also have had a record breeding of He,
he on Erritory Martini.
Our National Predator Control program has had its best
results to date, thanks to the science
and improved operational delivery that we've been using.
Monitoring shows sustained predator control has doubled
populations of rock.
Ren in five years, improved the health of forest canopies
and reversed declines of two of our rarest kiwi species.
Little spotted kiwi were rediscovered on the West coast,
previously thought to exist only on offshore islands,
an exciting find for genetic diversity on the visitor side.
We launched a smoother booking system,
opened a new great walk, the Hump Bridge track, and repaired
and reopened Cathedral Cove
and the Blue Pools bridges among other improvements.
We've also mobilized people to take action for nature
with a new campaign.
And the public response has been emphatic.
They're loving it. It's been a busy and challenging year.
We delivered our work program, including predator
and weed control, species management compliance,
and maintaining huts, tracks and bridges.
On top of that, we've also advanced major policy work at
PACE, including advising on conservation law reform, herds
of special interest, resource management
reform, and a forestation.
We set up a program to respond to fast track legislation
and taken over all the contracts run
by Predator Free 2050 Limited, which increases our work.
We've improved our regulatory system,
permission applications in our process twice as fast
as they were in February.
The minister's targets have been met
and the backlog more than halved.
We are now building a new end-to-end permission system
that is more efficient, customer focused,
and we will see better compliance.
As you know, we are the agency with the largest number
of treaty settlement obligations.
Over 3000,
we are making good progress on delivering against them.
We are working in partnership with Iwi Hapu at place.
Uh, that's part of who we are and what we do.
We've also picked up unscheduled work, including repairs
after floods in several regions and fires.
We've stood up new programs
with funding from the international visitor levy,
including the Milford Sustainability Project.
Increased predic to control on Raki aura.
Um, done foundational work
to eradicate invasive species from Auckland Island.
And we've got car parking charging pilots at three
South Island sites.
And behind the scenes we've been doing a lot
to improve our systems and ways of working.
Uh, bio invests helps us focus on biodiversity work
priorities, and it was fantastic
that the team could take you through that.
Recently we've got a new HR system,
which streamlines time sheets, payroll and recruitment,
and we've got faster technology,
which allows more time in the field.
We've also been focused on improving our financial
performance through better forecasting a
new commercial strategy.
And for the first time ever, a 10 year capital plan.
We've done all of this while making significant changes
to achieve the 6.5% savings target
and cover our own cost pressures absorbing inflation
and rising prices of materials.
Restructures in the past two financial years have removed
15% of our core workforce,
and we still need to absorb rising costs in future.
Being a steward of nature is a privilege.
Over the past four years I've been in this role,
we've made continuous improvements and efficiencies,
but major challenges threaten our ability
to sustain this work.
And we will go backwards under existing baselines. Mm-hmm.
We are facing pressure from climate change, wilding pines,
browsers, and more frequent severe storms.
We've had more states
of emergency every year on average in the past 10 years than
we did in the decade before.
There have been eight already this year,
like the windstorm in October.
We've also had the recent fire at Torero,
which cost millions to put out, plus the cost
of suppressing the weeds
and browsers that could have a devastating impact on
restoration if we don't deal with them.
Mm-hmm. Our spending on repairs to our visitor network
after storms has more than doubled in the past five years.
Wilding, conifers, infest 2 million hectares of the country,
half of them are on public conservation land.
30 million per year is needed to manage this,
but current spending is only a third of that.
We risk losing the gains made from over 180 million in crown
funding to date.
Signs of wild animals, including goats
and deer, have doubled since 2012.
They're now present at 82%
of our monitoring sites causing a decline in forest health.
On recreation, international visitor numbers are rebounding
to pre COVID levels with about a million visitors to Milford
and Raki Mount Cook each year.
Infrastructure is being strained, such
as H****r Valleys tracks, toileting challenges last summer,
and bridges needing to be built, rebuilt due to erosion.
We will need to be more ruthless
with prioritizing which assets we focus on
to manage within existing baselines.
Turning things around requires a change in mindset.
Businesses rely on clean air, quality, soil, fresh water,
and pollination services to run our economy.
Those ecosystem services on public conservation land are
worth about 11 billion per year.
Natural and physical capital on public conservation land is
worth 134 billion to New Zealanders Docks.
Current biodiversity diversity, spending
365 million a year only prevents irreversible loss
of ecosystems and species.
Our modeling shows roughly 2 billion a year is needed
for nature to thrive.
While that's unrealistic right now,
an extra 150 million a year would ensure ecosystems
and species don't go backwards.
50 million to ramp up high priority management
and a hundred million for urgent ecosystems
and species currently underfunded.
This reinforces why we need to make good decisions
around funding, and we are working really hard
to increase conservation revenue through philanthropy
and business partnerships,
and to use taxpayer dollars efficiently.
We also need support for law reform.
Iconica iconic visitor sites face pressure from
international visitors who currently access them for free
and don't contribute to maintenance or conservation efforts.
Statutory planning and concession systems need reform
to become clearer and more flexible.
We are consolidating policy and planning layers
and working with treaty partners to uphold commitments.
We are doing everything humanly possible
to protect the heart of the organization, explore
and create new revenue, make efficiencies,
and do science monitoring on a shoestring.
So we have good data, but it's not enough.
New Zealand's future depends on valuing healthy nature.
If we don't invest in nature-based assets,
the country will look vastly different in the next
20 to 50 years.
Thank you.
Thank you Penny, for those opening remarks.
Uh, look, we have got a few questions.
We're gonna start off with biodiversity on
the structured agenda.
So, uh, we, we'll go first to pre anchor.
Oh, overall performance. The overall performance.
Oh, yeah. Oh, sorry. Are we Yeah, no, we will, we will start
with overall performance Okay.
On the agenda, which she's kind of spoken about in terms
of her opening marks.
But yeah, ask the questions around overall performance
and then we'll move to biodiversity.
Okay. Um, thank you for your opening on that penny.
And thank you to the team for the work
that you've been doing over these past year as well.
Um, I have a question around the revenue sources to doc.
Uh, I note that DOC does, um, have both private
and philanthropic revenue sources.
I understand that's very unusual
for a government department to do so.
At the same time, I note
that the minister conservation minister's ex expectation is
that that will increase.
Um, I'm keen to get a sense of where that's at for, um, doc.
How much has it increased?
I'd be keen to get a sense of how much
of your work program is focused on increasing rep, private
and philanthropic revenue sources, and how you intend to
or currently go about doing that
and whether there's been a target set.
So over the last financial year,
we generated an extra $7.6 million in revenue.
So, uh, in terms of recreation charges, uh,
we had a $3 million increase.
Uh, concessions increased by $3 million,
and cost recovery on permissions increased by 1.6 million.
Uh, the third party investment that we get, um,
gave us 5 million less to do conservation work in 24 25.
So that's, um, for local government, for example.
And our commercial sponsorships, um, have remained, uh,
stable between years.
And what we are seeing with our, um, always been nature
and campaign, it's generated a lot of interest
and a lot more activity from people wanting
to get involved in conservation
and leading through to people wanting to partner with us
and be more active.
So just to clarify, you mentioned
that your third party revenue, uh, led
to a decrease in 5 million.
Mm-hmm. Can you explain that a little bit?
You, you mentioned local government,
so have you just received a, a decrease off 5 million?
Or what does
That mean? So, so what
it, what it means is some of the third parties
who would usually give us funding to contribute
to conservation are no longer doing that
for things like pest control and weed control.
Do you know why? We'll, just,
I've just got the facts. So
I, I I think we think it's the,
the current economic climate people are having to be, um,
a lot more discerning where they,
they put their investment. Um,
My final up on this line questioning, um,
in your annual report, and you've made remarks
before that, um, public trust
and confidence in the department
and the work of the department
and so on, um, is is important to, I guess,
lifting people's perception of the need to protect nature,
which is what underpins your current campaign as well.
I, I've been getting a fair bit of feedback that the
docs focus seems
to have shifted a fair bit on revenue gathering towards
revenue gathering, and it's pretty much,
and I, I know that's a ministerial direction,
not necessarily docs, um, perhaps intent,
but what would, what, what's your response to people who say
that you're spending a fair bit
of Docker spending a fair bit of time
on increasing revenue sources, including from private
and philanthropic, um, sources,
which is per perhaps slightly odd
for government department instead
of focusing on their core business, which is
to protect the kayak?
So I think it's an end.
I think, uh, what you'll have heard from my opening remarks
is we have been incredibly deliberate about continuing
to get results for conservation over the last year.
We've had to become more efficient and effective
and productive to be able to do that.
So we with Hand On Heart can say, we are still continuing
to get good results for nature, good results for visitors.
And we've had to really focus on how do we look at ourselves
to become more commercial
and generate more revenue so we don't go backwards.
And we've had a number
of staff who've worked incredibly hard, um, to do that.
And I think what we've seen through, uh,
always Be Naturing campaign is there are a number
of people out in the community
and the business sector
who are getting very excited about being part of that.
Thank you. Look, we've got a couple
of subs on this question line, so I'll go to Grant.
Yeah. I just wanna confirm, I mean the, this,
this concept of, uh, ing revenue from, from philanthropic
and outside the department is not new, is it?
It's been around for a long time.
So the department has done that for many years.
It's, we've got a number of partners such as, um,
air New Zealand, Genesis, ux, et cetera, that we've,
we've had in place for many years. Yeah.
And okay, so that's, that was, um, uh,
that one. Oh, that's all.
Yeah, that's, And then just another stuff on that from,
Yep. Yes. Um,
we've all known that, um,
doc have had really successful partnerships, um,
for, for a number of years.
Um, but has there been an, a change in terms
of maybe FDE resource within,
has there been an increased focus on the need for private
or other philanthropic and other funding sources?
Has that put extra strain, um, on the resource specifically
for seeking, um, alternative forms of funding?
So I think there are, um,
so there's two parts to that question.
So in terms of our workforce, um,
like many other government departments,
we've been running change processes over the last year
to reduce our workforce
to deliver on targets, uh, for savings.
So, um, we, as the changes that we've,
we've made, um, over the last 12 months flow
through our workforce, we will have 264, uh, fewer roles.
And, um, so we will have, uh, fewer FTEs. Mm-hmm.
And then in terms of the revenue generation, um, we have had
an increased focus on that
because what we're trying to do is ensure that, um,
we continue to generate revenue
to put into, into conservation
And keep going with those subs.
Do you, would you like to talk about the impact
of those ft job losses on specific projects,
specific conservation, particularly your core
conservation work focus?
Are you able to tell the committee what sort
of impact those job losses have on your actual ongoing work?
So as I mentioned in my opening remarks,
I am incredibly grateful and proud of my organization
because we have maintain, like, uh,
we have managed to retain really solid
results for conservation.
While we have had some big restructuring processes going on.
And that always involves a lot of change in an organization.
And we have managed to retain our results
by essentially becoming more productive.
Mm-hmm. So that, that is
what we have done over the last few years.
And as I said in my opening remarks with the scale
of cost pressures we need
to absorb over the next four years, which
by 20 29 30 is 128 million,
that gets really challenging.
Mm-hmm. So I think we, we will continue to look
to generate further revenue.
Uh, but what, what I was indicating in my opening remarks is
we are at risk of starting to get into not being able
to deliver as many results as we are currently
because productivity only gets you so far.
Thank you. Thank you. And just sticking on the topic
of revenue, um, with the
Supplementaries, uh, Rachel Has
A question Yeah. Do
this up and thank you. And noting, again,
your introductory remarks, I think I've heard from you
before is that this $2 billion is really,
if you are in charge of the world, that's, that's
what we be having Beautiful biodiversity
in general happiness, but, but we're not having that.
And so, um, so your point is that to,
to not go backwards, um,
another 200 million is required
and the focus for Dock at the moment is getting that extra
extra revenue from, um, non-government sources.
Is that correct? Is that a fair summary?
So, And, and,
and then, um, if you, I'm happy
to have my numbers slightly out and,
and for you to fix those, but is that then that requirement
to not go, to, not go backwards is,
and the money sought by non-government organizations, is, is
that a target from the minister for you to achieve?
So I think that the role of the public service is
to give decision makers really good advice on, um,
you know, what, what you will get
for different levels of investment.
And that, that was a challenge, uh,
minister aka gave us three years ago.
And we have done a lot of work in bio invests so
that we can give any decision maker really good information
on what it takes to have healthy, thriving nature, uh,
which is that $2 billion figure.
But we also are able to give advice on if you want
to move up the curve, what what you will get
for particular levels of investment.
And what, what I was indicating in my upfront remarks
is we, we know there are economic challenges in the country.
Um, so we, we think for, you know, an additional amount
of 150 million per annum, there are real gains
that you could make, um, for species
and to deal with some
of the threats that we are dealing with.
And, um, as we'll get into the agenda later on, um,
you know, we, we have some really big threats in terms
of wildings ungulates,
and with the cha a change in climate, uh,
we face more pest and disease.
So part of our role is to be able
to give really good advice if you want to do something about
that, what, what the options look like.
And so that 150 million Yep.
Um, are you trying to get non-government fund for
that 150 million
and is that then shown on page 94
of the annual report in terms of how much is,
is being obtained?
So I think it would be fair to say
that Doc is making the case everywhere about
how any investment could be best spent.
So for example, as the international visitor levy comes in,
uh, we are using Bio Invest
and where we think investment needs to go
to provide advice about where that investment should go
with the work that we are doing with our, um, partners
or through what we're doing through always be nurturing.
We are giving the, um, private sector that information
and uh, you know, in some
of the discussions we've been having
that has been really mobilizing to get some of them to want
to do more.
One New Zealand would be a really good example in terms
of a recent partnership that, that we've done.
Okay. So it is, um, your point there is that
it's not just non-government funding,
it's also revenue generating from Dock itself?
Yes. Mm.
Just, I might just ask myself on that
because I was just wondering, um, obviously in the breakdown
of the areas where you're gathering revenue,
there's a section of other, what, what comes into other
in terms of the revenue, because obviously we talked about
the donations and sponsorships
and the partnerships, et cetera.
And then you've got the recreation and tourism charges
and then administration and cost recoveries.
But, um, what, what's the other,
Oh, I'm not sure just The discre here?
No. That, that other is in, um,
the annual reviews in terms
of your breakdown of the revenue.
Maybe you could just explain the breakdown
of your revenues in terms of where they're coming from.
So, um, broad broadly, our revenue comes from, um,
the, the Crown third party revenue,
the international visitor levy.
Then, um, what we do through partnerships, uh,
donations, et cetera.
Um, so the, the other May bequeath.
Yeah, so the other may cover things like, for example, the,
we've had a large bequeath in the, the last year from, um,
someone in Hawke's Bay that we are then, you know,
allocating out to the community there.
Okay. And so those are the main sort of sources. Yeah.
So there's of obviously a lot
of other sources out there in general where the revenue
and the, and the money comes from to fund a lot of the work.
So there, there are.
Um, and so, you know, things like donations
and bequeaths are a source of, you know, a, a revenue. Yep.
Thank you. And Celia has a start. Thank you.
Thank you. It's really on, um,
how we balance those different sources of revenue with your
need for 2 billion or more.
I just wanted, my first question is just
how did you get exactly to that requirement
of the 2.3 billion in order to
really set us on a good path?
So I've got my experts here who have done the work, so I,
I will get them to come up
because it's within our bio invest work.
We have taken our, our science
and research to build up what that looks like.
But there are far people who are far better placed than
me to take you through that.
Sure. Um, so this relates to the bio invests work
that we briefed you on.
Um, and so what we did is we looked at what it would take
to, we wrote the recipe for what it would take
to get every species and ecosystem
to being really healthy and doing great.
We're not worried about it anymore.
And to manage every threat.
Now that would be like having a wonderfully perfectly
functioning housing system or health system
or, you know, like we are quite realistic about, uh,
we're not here asking you for $2 billion,
but we do have, uh, a picture that tells us
for every extra dollar we get in the door,
we know the next best place
that we would want to spend that money.
So that's us adding up,
if you were doing credit control everywhere, you, you know,
you'd managed to get Tata et debris a lot more,
like you've got them all out of being in that critical state
so that, that's what the full picture would look like.
And obviously that would take quite some time.
Thank you. And that was a very good briefing the other
day, but what I didn't have with me at that point was
I don't think we had the actual ecosystem services
that that would provide.
So you talked about 11 billion,
there's two numbers, there's an 11 billion number
and there's 134 billion number.
Um, can you relate that?
Is that, to that full funding of 2.3 billion?
So, so what we've done, so that,
those figures I used in my opening were figures
that we got the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research
to do as a baseline for
what is the value from the natural assets
that are within public conservation land.
So that's, that's your baseline number.
And then the, the other figures, uh, around
what it would take to get to having thriving nature.
It's what it would cost to, to do the work effectively.
And then you would get, uh, broader ecosystem benefits
that would flow on from doing that work.
Okay. So that 11 billion is a more direct result.
So the, the first figures I gave you, we wanted to get
as a baseline so that over time you can keep redoing that
and be able to give advice on whether that's going,
you know, up, up or down.
That's, you know, in terms of the,
the state of our natural assets. Okay.
So it would be very useful if we were able
to get some kind of cost benefit analysis as is often done
for transport projects.
The other question I had just on,
Just, we're just going to, um,
stick on the overall performance
and revenue, uh, revenue at this point.
Revenue in related to revenue. Okay. Then go.
It certainly is.
It's um, um, follows on from, um, one
of my colleague Priya's questions.
Um, which is the amount that you get from philanthropy
and or bequests and
or, um, non government donations.
It might be from private companies, it might be in fact,
and you seen it as hardly a private company, but nevermind.
Um, how do you see the competition
between Dock
and many conservation organizations,
whether it's the big ones like Forest and Bird,
or whether it's the individual sanctuaries like Zealandia
or Territory?
I mean, do you think there's a potential for, um, them
to feel that, hey, docs put their hand up for money
that should be going to the NGOs? So
I'm gonna get c to come up
because we were really deliberate in the campaign
that we had around mobilizing for nature to involve a range
of different people.
And we really threshed out some of those issues so hand
to see who leads that program.
So yeah, we've proactively worked with environmental NGOs,
um, put them all together, told them exactly
what we are trying to achieve, and we're really clear.
We're not trying to create a competitive system here.
What we're trying to do is grow the pipe so
that we all get more of it.
And I think key to that is Revaluing,
how people look at nature
and each one of those environmental NGOs works really hard
in their own space, but we could see
that actually if we work together, um, like you,
that's why the campaign is designed in the way
that it's not promoting doc, it's promoting nature
and it's trying to activate people
to give back to get involved.
And so I think that at least resonates
with those other environmental NGOs.
And there's so many who work in this space of conservation,
um, who are doing the, a little bit each, each
of us doing our bit that combined,
um, actually gets us a long way.
So we're not trying to compete, as I say, we're trying
to grow the pie and, um,
and in fact what we are doing through the campaign, so
where we get activations come through for our website,
we're actually directing people onto those
organizations as well as ourselves.
So providing people the option
because it might be that, you know,
I might decide I'd rather
I want to give to Forest some bird.
That's, that's what ring, that's what rings my bell. Great.
So long as it's going to nature. That's fantastic.
I, I'd just also add to that, I mean we are here
for the species and ecosystem.
So, uh, we often do provide, um, funding, whether it's
to manga, Tori, there are a lot of centuries
and other, you know, groups that we are dependent on them,
um, for doing work with threatened species.
And so where we need to provide funding through
to others, we do that as well.
Mm. Thank you. Brilliant. Thank you.
Look, we've just got two further subs on the
overall performance and revenue.
So, uh, I'll go to Grant and then
Rachel. Oh, it
was pre, oh, pre,
Yeah. Um, you think your,
the other, you,
you mentioned when you were, um, talking about the, the, so
for example, pest control
that the regional councils would seem to be step,
have seemed to have some cases stepped back from
that process yet they, um, my observation is that they are,
I understand they're expected
to play their part in the space.
Uh, so what, what, um, what's been your approach
and what, um, what uh, what, what can we actually do
to actually help make them do their bit
to work with you in this space?
'cause I know they've got obligations this
Control. So, so we
work really closely with others, um,
on both biodiversity and biosecurity.
So, uh, we work a lot with, uh, the councils
and ministry for primary industries.
And one of the things that we've been thinking a lot about
as we come into the next implementation plan for,
for Biodiversity is really identifying what are some
of those key threats
and then how do we join up with others so
that we're all investing in the things that are going
to have the biggest impact.
And Bio Invests will help us to do that.
So even if everyone's got less to put in,
it goes into the things that will have the,
the biggest impact like Wilding Pines
or some of the pest control work we're
doing. Is there anything you'd want to
Add? Yeah, that's right. So I
mean, councils do a lot
of the wilding conifer control, uh, via NPI, they do a lot
of possum control, you know, they a lot of activity
and they're really critical in the predator free work.
Like they're absolutely critical at place for that work.
So we work with them a lot,
but also in the, like, at different times, like we may, um,
deliver some monitoring outcomes for them or vice versa.
So we do work together and just figure out who's best place
to do things sometimes too, but
Have they dialed back that contribution in recent years
So that, that there are a mix of players that,
that have dialed back
and it, it, it adds up to that, um, 5 million.
But I, I can assure you we work very closely with,
with councils and we're, we're all trying
to make sure we have the biggest impact we can
with the investment that we've cumulatively got.
Yep. Thank you. And
Look, we'll take one last
Question on this subject area from Priyanka.
Thank you. Um, and I apologize for being a bit
of a dog with Bone on this.
We've, um, spoken a bit about it,
but I don't feel like I've had a
satisfactory answer to this.
And it's just about,
so I'm referencing a cabinet paper on Dots website
where the minister has specifically, um, basically said
that there is acknowledged that there is a need
for third party revenue and for DOC
to attract more third party funding.
So it is that word attract that I'm trying
to tease out here.
And I want to know, and I'm not talking about the
partnerships within New Zealand
or the work that happens in the conservation space,
but purely when it comes to big requests or grants
or donations that Dock is meant to be seeking, I want
to know whether there is a target figure there
and if so, what planning has been done to achieve that
and whether that money is for specific projects
around conservation or whether that goes to dock's baseline.
So the Minister of Conservation has been very clear
with the department that we are responsible
for a large amount of land
and that his expectation is
that we generate more revenue than we currently do, um, of
what we are responsible for.
Uh, he hasn't set us a specific target, uh,
that we are aiming to meet at the moment,
but he has been clear that he thinks, you know, we, we need
to be really focusing on doing the, the best that we can
to generate, um, revenue in different ways
and be more commercial than we have been to date.
Is there anything you'd add?
Um, just, you know, I think someone was
you before, it's a bit unusual.
Uh, I think Doc, you know, doc is a bit unique.
We have some levers that we can pull and,
and so I think, um, which sets us apart a little bit,
but gives us some advantages.
So we've always been able to charge for, um, you know,
particularly we had a lot
of international tours using Great Walks.
We've got a lot of visitor assets.
We also have had long standing commercial partnerships.
Some of them are 15 years. Yeah.
Um, most recently we signed with one New Zealand,
that's a $14 million partnership over six years.
That's really significant.
And yes, we are looking to bring in philanthropic funding
through donations, all of these things we are trying
to pull all of the levers.
And what I would say is it's back to
reframing the value on nature
because it's actually not just for a government department
or a government agency to do, we actually think
that there is a role for everyone, community groups,
individuals, philanthropists, business.
And that's what we're trying to activate.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Look, we will now move on to the next topic on our agenda,
which is biodiversity.
So, um, we'll open it up now for questions around,
uh, this topic.
Uh, so, um,
if members have questions on biodiversity,
um, we will open that up.
So Preya, if you want to kickstart,
Thank you.
So many questions. I dunno where to start.
Um, let's start a little bit with, um,
the biodiversity strategy.
And I get that there's a new plan that is underway mm-hmm.
That it is cross agency.
Um, and therefore presumably you would be looking at, uh,
to your previous point, the role
that various agencies play when it comes
to improving biodiversity outcomes.
Are you then concerned that across government, um,
based on PC's latest report
that environmental spend is down $1 billion?
And what's your advice been around that to various agencies
through the strategy, um, implementation plan process?
So I think in, in terms of the work that we're doing
around the implementation plan of the, the strategy,
um, as I'm I mentioned
before, I think that's a huge opportunity for us, uh,
through the bio invests work, uh, that we've been doing.
I think we are much better placed than we've been in the
past to be, um, sharing with a range of people,
uh, what the national priorities are, uh,
what potentially they could do that matters, uh,
in terms of where they're based.
And what we are finding is that we have got, uh,
local government, iwi business, um,
e NGOs really interested in
that work that, that we are doing.
So I, I think there's a huge opportunity to mobilize a range
of people against the things that that matter most.
So that, that's exciting.
Um, in terms of the investment that we put into, um, nature
as as a country, um, do I think it's enough?
No. Do I think we could do more? Yes.
Um, but what we are focused on is the Department
of Conservation is whatever is invested in nature,
we are focused on using that as best we can, um,
to have the, the most impact we can get with what we've,
we've got currently invested in nature.
How also on that, um, on that similar vein,
there is a line, I don't remember what what page
of the annual annual report,
but it's under the Fast Track, um, uh,
paragraphs in the annual report.
And you have a line in there that basically says that most
of public conservation land is exempt from fast
track projects.
But how do you reconcile that with, with um,
projects like Deni
and Plateau, where then there's a full mine
that will destroy so much of that unique ecosystem
through the Fast, potentially through the Fast Track, um,
regime that has come into play.
Um, I'm just, I'm just curious as to, I mean
that's stewardship land, stewardship Land is
still public Conservation land.
How do you reconcile the two there
and what has DOT's role been in those specific projects?
So as, um, it,
it's the usual process in terms of how government works.
So, um, as the government has made policy on,
uh, fast Track legislation, our policy people were involved.
Doc provided their advice along with, um, other agencies
and then ministers make decisions
and once they have made decisions, um, it is our role
to implement what what has been put in place.
So since the Fast Track has been in place, the role
that we play is in the timeframes that we get.
We need to provide the best information that, that we can,
uh, through to the panels making decisions.
And, um, I think if you look at the results that we've had
around that, we have been doing, um, things to, to time, um,
and as, as effectively as as we can.
Thank you. Can I do a reset last, last, just on
that last sentence there.
You need, um, you're saying you're doing your best in terms
of fast track projects.
Uh, do you need more time?
Would you be able to give better information with more time?
So once again, um,
decision makers make decisions on the timeframes that they
think is needed in terms of fast track
and then we do the, the absolute best that we can
to implement, um, within those timeframes.
And what I see is officials working really hard together
to work out how to make those processes
work more effectively.
And we're also doing a lot of work with applicants
because what we find is the earlier applicants work with us,
the more that we can work through issues at the front end,
the better those processes go.
And we are finding that, um, applicants who come to us and,
and work through early at that, that front end,
we do get the time to work, work
through the things that we need to do. And
How, how many, um, applications has DOC been
Involved with? So
we've been pretty much involved all of with all
of them except one.
So we've currently got 71 applications
that we're involved in at the moment.
Yeah. And, uh, many
of them land swaps. How many of those were,
Um, I dunno if I've got that.
So a lot of them, they're right across mining for, you know,
housing, all sorts of things.
I don't know if I have the land swap numbers in
front of me, but I could have a look.
Thank You. Thank you. And Grant has a highlighted.
Yeah, Thank you. Um, thank you Pin you highlighted the
start with those, it sort
of fits in here in your original comments about the, um,
progress you made, the fur return.
Mm-hmm. Um, and obviously the relationship
with the community then and working with the, uh,
mflow Harbor Restoration Society
and the dredging and all that.
How, uh, 'cause I had some in, I had some feedback that, um,
they found working with Doc quite challenging in that space.
And I'm just curious as to what your view might be on that.
So I would be really interested in if,
if you've had feedback, um, from anyone
that we are difficult to work with mm-hmm.
Um, I'd be keen for that person
to get in touch with me directly.
Mm-hmm. And we'll work through, um,
how we can be better to work with.
One of the things that matters to us is that, um,
we are easy to work with, particularly when we are working,
um, with such precious species.
So, um, I haven't heard of that example,
but I'm very open to talking to someone. No,
I happy to give you some feedback, but thank you. I want
To thank you and Cameron Luxton,
I have two questions of this,
uh, section, if that's all right.
Chair. Um, the first one's about, um, try trying to,
I'm just interested, a quick question about this big,
this government in parliament been progressing, um,
GE legislation
and what future has DOC looked into at using genetic
technology for managing a species such as, I mean,
golden clam or others that,
but there isn't really any other way.
It's obvious, um,
how we're gonna get under control I than throwing
$2 million, um, around,
but could you talk to that a little bit? Yeah,
We are, we are certainly interested in that.
So whether it's welding conifers, um,
we know there's quite a lot of interest in mice as well.
Uh, mice is one of the rodents we don't have a tool for yet.
So, um, that would be something
that we'd be really interested in.
Uh, and through when we, um, took over some of the, um,
contracts that the Predator free, uh, company had,
we have picked up some of their research
that they were doing in this space.
So we'll keep that work going.
So we personally,
actively aren't doing any research ourselves.
We would be a benefactor of that research
and be very supportive of it.
And of course it doesn't work so well for things like cats
and other things where people, you know, yeah,
you might have a flow over impact,
but we are certainly interested. Yeah.
So things that no one likes, like golden clamps
For example, the things no one likes.
When you say support, uh, cheer, um,
when you say supportive of, uh, what does
that look like supportive from afar and cheering on?
Or are you, uh, is stop looking at allocating funding to
that as a situation?
Are you making promises?
Are you bringing people in house providing data?
What does that actually look like?
So at the moment, and as part of the research community
that we are in, we'll often talk about those kind
of use cases and the benefits we would see from it.
And certainly, uh, you know, some
of the contracts we do have in the Predator Free environment
around understanding the kind of, um, genome of, you know,
different threat species.
So that will contribute to the wider scientific community.
I mean, the ledge, uh, I don't think,
I don't think everything's enacted yet.
So, um, once it is, we, we can think about our research.
Um, but the public research organizations will have a big
role to play in this in the future.
And again, we would support them with the data
and information and the uses that we have,
but it may not be something that we have a whole lot
of skill sets in ourselves.
But that's a question we can think about
into the future. Cool.
Thank, Thank you. And, um, thank you.
Um, it's picking up on being able
to actively manage species and Oh yeah,
because I wrote, was it, was it Stephanie?
Yeah. I wrote, um, your quote, we are here
for species and ecosystems.
Fabulous. So in light of that, which I would assume
as the copa, um,
and then looking at current funding with biodiversity,
biodiversity strategy, what sort
of strategies is DOC considering?
Um, so at the moment we understand you're actively able
to manage about 10 to 15% of species recurrent funding.
How do we get to increase that?
How does doc help the country to get to increase that?
And I guess flipping that around, what's gonna happen?
What's gonna happen if it's, if it's, um, continues
to be limited in terms of the amount of species
and ecosystems you're able to protect and manage?
So I think we do a phenomenal amount with the funding
that we have and we partner incredibly well.
So I think the thing that I always think about
with species management is it's everything from the bespoke
work that we're doing partnering with Auckland Zoo
and others on, uh, it's the research we're doing
with universities in the lab to try
and breed nobbled weevils, uh, through
to the big landscape scale stuff.
And as Penny mentioned this morning, you know,
doubling populations of some species over time, you know,
we've got missile toe coming back that's,
Henry gets particularly excited about that.
Fair enough. Um, if I look at some of the work we've done
with the likes of the next foundation
where we basically partner with them 50 50
and they're putting in significant volumes of money
and so are we, uh, we are seeing huge gains for species
where we are doing work together.
Um, we actually also, as I said
before, we rely very heavily on a whole lot
of other entities who fundraise themselves.
They of course, um, you know, provide sanctuaries
and all sorts of things and we help
with species recovery where we can.
So we work really hard to make sure
we have a really good balance across all
of those different species that we need to look after.
So where we need to do bespoke
and they're where we need to, um, do more broad scale stuff.
And then we partner with universities a lot, of course
as well work with masters
and PhD students about some of the research we need there.
So look, we are holding the line. Mm-hmm.
Um, but we are making gains every year.
Can I, can I thank you.
Can I pick up on that a little bit more?
And I'm just sort of looking at, um,
your species count assessment.
I'm not gonna read them out, but I think what I'm saying is
with, even with all of that, are we gonna be able
to act at scale of what is needed of the, at the scale
of the crises and the challenge as of what is needed?
Um, even with our best efforts on the current trajectory,
are we gonna lose some species and some ecosystems?
Uh, you'll never find me saying
that we're gonna lose species, right.
Ecosystems 'cause um,
but you know, we also have to prepare
for things like bird flu
and all sorts of things that does put extra pressure.
We are doing a whole lot of work to understand the impact
of climate change and our ability of species
and ecosystems to adapt.
So I guess never say never, there's always a risk,
but that's why, you know, through the mobilize for nature
and everything we were talking about before mm-hmm.
How we partner with others, um, to come in
and help us with the, with the hands-on work that we need
to do or that others need to do.
Um, and I look at the amazing efforts of communities all
around New Zealand on predator free of course,
who are helping with biodiversity
in their backyard every day.
So, you know, when you actually get people behind a mission,
you can do quite a lot.
So I'm, I'm just going to build on that
because if so, at, at the moment, some of the,
the biggest threats that we have got for our ecosystems
and our species, uh, wilding pines, um, ungulates
and pests and diseases.
Mm-hmm. And so we, we know what it costs to deal
with those things and if we, if we don't invest
that in the next 10 to 20 years mm-hmm.
Um, New Zealand will be really different. Mm-hmm.
So for example, with Wilding Pines, we know
where our biggest seed sources are.
It's the branch in Letham Valleys in Brook.
We know what it would cost to get that under control.
So over 20 years that would be 156 million.
If we don't get that under control, that is going
to have an impact on both public conservation land
and primary sector land.
So I, I think, um,
and then also what, what we are seeing through some
of the research that we've done in terms
of climate change impacts under a high climate scenario,
if we are, we are potentially looking at having,
I think rat populations doubling by 2090.
And so that, that's quite significant for what,
what happens, um, you know, to to public conservation land.
So I think some of
what we are getting really interested in looking at is
what is the future of conservation with some
of those different things that we're seeing happening
with the changing climate.
Um, and then what are those different scenarios depending on
how we invest to deal with those threats.
Thank you. I think there's also, oh sorry,
just something really quickly about the balance of
there are a bunch of New Zealanders out there who want
to get involved mm-hmm.
And then there's some really specialist work.
And so, um, the more we get others involved in a whole lot
of activity out there, there's a bunch of specialists, um,
in iwi communities and doc
and universities that then can contribute
because quite often the really big landscape stuff will not
save some of the really unique critical things
that need quite hands-on bespoke solutions.
So we've gotta get a mix of all of those things. Thank you.
And just a couple of subs on that, uh, grant.
Yeah. How, um, you raised wild in pine conversation
and we all recognize the, the challenge in that space.
Mm-hmm. How would you describe your relationship with the,
the farmers and the landowners that you're often
and your neighbors in that space?
So we are working a lot with, um, farmers
and foresters
and I'll, I'll get Henry to contribute to that on both
what we do in terms of, um, wilding pines,
but also with things like fire.
Mm-hmm. Um, so, you know, for example, what
what we are seeing is we are having to deal
with a lot more fires than we've had to in the past.
So we are, we are starting to go back to working with, um,
you know, the, the primary sector
and foresters to look at how we can really work together on,
on some big things like that.
So, um, you know, that there will always be more
that we can do, but I think with some of those areas we,
we've got a really common challenge.
And so we are deliberately having more regular meetings
to work out how we can do more together
and use the particular skill sets that we've got.
But what, what would you add to that?
Yeah, and, and look, I'd say it's different circumstances,
different relationships around the country.
And some of the interactions we've got
with the primary sector
and farming community is,
is over the increased potential use of grazing
to control wilding pines.
It's only effective for a small part of the life cycle
of a pine understand obviously only when
they're, they're very small.
So there are conversations happening there.
Um, there's a lot of reflection
and probably coming out of the branch leaf in the area.
I'm not sure if you've talked to some of the,
the farmers up there.
Um, but that was in the area where the government
through the forest service in sixties
and seventies planted, um, well
Aware. Yeah,
Yeah, yeah. Planted the,
um, water primarily.
And, and so again, from a, from a landowner perspective, um,
there's a pretty strong view that government caused a bit
of this government needs to step up, step up to, um, step up
to the plate really in terms of dealing with it.
Um, but penny's right. Um,
also moving into things like fire management, um, and,
and picking up responsibilities
And the, the use of, 'cause one of the things, um,
I did a high country tour down there mm-hmm.
In North Canterbury and one
of the things they talked about is that one
of the tactics they use
to control wildly pines is actually fire.
And and what's your view on that
and do you work is I mentioned on what doc's view on use use
of fire to control wild mine?
Yeah. And look, I'll flick across to step in a minute,
but, um, it, it depends again.
Mm-hmm. A lot of our answers will be, it depends, some
of the pine species will actually, um, thrive,
um, when you burn.
Um, so it'll release seed source, they will do even better.
Um, others we haven't used it.
Um, it is something we probably need
to look at in some limited cases.
Certainly not a silver bullet, but I'll share.
Yeah. So I think the answer again is it depends, um,
there is a lot of other biodiversity in the area,
including a lot of, you know, very critical species
that we don't wanna set a light.
Uh, and as Henry said,
often weeds bounce back quicker than a lot
of our native species.
Um, and yeah.
And whether we can control it would be a key thing.
Yeah, I understand all that.
But as part of the fo fire is,
is the grazing then goes along with that.
You, the farmers talk about it's been a tool they've used in
the past to control
and I suppose the concept in terms of, I, I appreciate
what you're saying about losing biodiversity and species,
but if the place is covered in wilding Pines,
well it's not much there.
Yeah. So we, yeah, we've,
and we are actually doing some research trials.
So we think that Graz is useful
for about the first two years of life lifecycle.
We, through Tim's team, uh,
we're actually doing some research into that just
to get a bit more data
because it is something we wanna
understand more into the future.
And then, um, Peter's also been doing quite a bit of work
with fed farmers just to think
strategically how we can look at this as well. Have
You asked the farmers who've been done this in the past,
what they've seen and working with them?
'cause they might already have the knowledge,
the research could be shortened
Course. Yeah. So we
are definitely all, all connected up.
We're doing it together. Thank you. Yeah.
And just two further subs on this, Cameron.
Thank you. Um, one of the community, you,
you talked about partnering well
with community groups and that's fantastic.
One of the groups that I think would like to partner
with hunting community.
What sort of, um, funds for, for training
or, uh, teaching people how, uh, to hunt, uh,
enabling people to sight in their guns perhaps, uh,
enabling access, going around making sure gates are open so
that people can get out.
Now what, uh, and
and these funds that are being administered for bio, um,
biodiversity processes, I mean, what sort
of funds are available for hunting groups, uh, to deal
with the ambulance that,
that we've outlined are becoming a problem?
Do you wanna start? Uh, yeah.
So, um, our Wild Animals team works really closely, um,
with the hunting sector along with uh, um,
the New Zealand Deer Association, GAC of course as well.
I think one of the challenges we have is, uh, we
got a funding booth a few years back
of $30 million over four years.
And some of that does, you know, support
with recreational hunting.
Part of the challenges is we just do not have enough funding
for all of the work we need to do in the wild animal space.
So we have to balance it across, um, how we work
with others, make sure we get more recreational hunters out
there, how we're supporting some of the commercial hunting.
Um, and actually how we're doing control
because we're not staying in front of the problem.
Okay. So instead of being able to fund directly,
what about, uh, is doc leading some kind of, um,
hunting management plan, some kind of master plan
for the country of how, uh,
recreational hunting could be used as a control, uh, tool?
Is Doc doing any work on that? Yeah,
Stop. I think if Ben
was here, he'd probably tell you a lot more
about that, but I don't have the details
so we can come back to you on that.
Um, but it is part of a much bigger strategy around the role
of rec hunting, which, um, is hard to do enough rec hunting
for the volume of the deer
problem that we have in New Zealand.
So it is about just knowing how much of that we need
to do along with commercial hunting as well.
I was gonna say that's incredibly difficult without any
support and uh, that's, anyway,
So, so what, what I would add into that is,
so I don't have the exact figure on me,
but we, we have invested in some training, um, for people
to be safe while they're hunting.
And one of the things that, um, I did a couple of years ago,
That program, We can get it for you.
Um, and one of the things that I went to, um, a couple
of years ago as the hunting
and fishing, um, portfolio was stood up, was out
to the local range out of Wellington, uh, with the,
the hunting entity that was providing that, that training.
And it, it, it was really excellent in terms of,
of hearing how that was going.
We have also been trialing a range of different things
with the hunting sector in terms of
what works in different forest areas to get a sense of, um,
how, how we work together in terms of what they can do, um,
and how low, you know, they can get species
and then how we come in and follow through afterwards.
So we are definitely over the last couple
of years doing much more
with the hunting sector than we've done previously.
And I think the relationship is, is definitely improving
and we are learning some really good
things through those trials.
So you recognize the relationship hasn't been great in
the past, but it's important.
Abso So I think what, what I've seen is
that we have put a lot of effort into that relationship.
Um, and you know, I think we,
we work really closely together on a, on a range of things.
And the, the feedback
that I get including from the hunting sector is
that there's a lot of that, that,
that is going better than it has in the past.
Thank you. Just while we're on hunting,
'cause there's a few questions around this, uh,
Rachel, you had up
The material? Yes, I,
uh, yes.
So on, on hunting
and noting that your baseline's being cut by 31.3 million,
uh, per year, how much is it costing you to stand up
that hunting and fishing minister in the
roles associated with that?
So I don't have that number at my fingertips.
We'll come back to you on that in a written answer. Thank
You. Okay. And Grant.
Alright. So I'm interested by your comment
around you feel the relationship
with Hunter Communities, um, improving.
Well, it would, my sense is that we'll probably need
to improve having talked to some hunters
and the Game Animal Council, they get intensely frustrated
when they, uh, when they're working with Doc
and they don't feel that they're being, um, uh, trusted and,
and seen as a trusted partner.
Do you have a comment on that?
So I think a, again, if there are people you are talking
to who want to come in directly to me
and talk about, you know, their experience of working
with us, I'm very open to hearing that.
Um, we work regularly through our Wild Animals team
with, um, N-Z-D-A-G.
Uh, we as a senior leadership team meet
with the recreation sector once a quarter.
And, um, the feedback that I get through those forums is
that, uh, we, we have a really, you know,
more forums than we've ever had in terms of working through,
um, contentious issues
and that we are partnering on, on far more things.
So we, we can always get better,
but I think we are putting a huge amount
of effort into making those relationships work.
And, and just an example of, I suppose, um, one
of the areas that frustrates 'em is they, they see
that they can really add value in the pest control space
and we, and the, the whole hosey discussion,
which is still ongoing mm-hmm.
Um, around, and you, the use of the, like the WPP Foundation
to do help with your, make your budget go further.
Um, is do you see that, that, um, uh,
are those relationships as really important
as an opportunity to help make your budget go further?
Yes, and we, we are working, you know, closely
with the sector, um, on opportunities to be to do that.
Thank you. Thank you.
Look, we'll go to Priyanka for a supplementary,
almost hunting, uh, area.
Very quick sub given
that you just said Doc is doing a lot more with the hunting,
um, sector off leg.
How is doc managing the conflicts?
Some will say perceived, some will say real between hunting
and conservation outcomes.
So what I think what, what we are really
focusing on is working through with everything we do
with the hunting sector, understanding what's important, um,
to the hunt hunting sector as a recreation experience
and what's important
to conservation in terms of healthy nature.
And then working through, you know, how,
how we can work together on those things. Like every
Other user of this. Uh,
just, um, Priyanka did do another supplementary on that.
No. Good. Okay. Celia,
Thank you. Um, and
A supplementary on the hunting Christian.
Absolutely. Yep. Um, I could share pictures
of my son in the last year he shot, if you really like,
but, um, now I, I just wondered if you would be able
to share some information when you share
the other hunting information.
Um, I was at a hui, um,
with the Rahini fi protectors,
and it was broader than just the streams in Theo.
Um, and there were some very interesting numbers about
how many of the herd had to
be cu in order to reduce the numbers.
And they did a comparison with helicopter shooting
and leaving the carcasses there.
And, um, hunters coming in.
And it seemed very much dependent on
the numbers in the hood, what was most effective.
And I think I wondered if you could contribute to showing us
how it's not black
and white, that there are some places
where recreational hunting would do the job
and there are some places where it would barely touch the
edges and, and how we can potentially judge that
to make some political decisions.
So if, if it's useful to the committee, um, Ben Reddicks,
who is our lead in the wild animal space is, um,
overseas at the moment enjoying national parks in America.
But just like we did with Bio Invest,
if you want a deeper dive on everything
that's going on in the wild animal space,
how the trials are going with things that we're doing, um,
in the rahini
and some of the, you know, more nuanced detail, um,
that you are suggesting, we'd be very happy to set up,
you know, a session on that. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Look, this hunting discussions opened up a
whole lot of supplementary questions.
I'm just going to go to Ryan Hamilton now.
Thanks Chair. Um, just regarding the hers
of special interest, I can't recall to,
to doc submit in the select committee process on that
Supporting agency to the minister.
Right. Okay. So you're just stay arms length.
So we, we are the agency that supports the Minister
of Hunting and fishing, so we, yeah.
We provide him policy advice
and, you know, it's Peter's team
that support the minister with that work. Thank
You. The people in the
Room and Cameron Luxton
Just, um, on that, uh, topic of, uh, the costs
of recovering deer, um, versus leaving them, uh, has
what stock's opinion of the costs of using, uh,
poisons like Bro Dum
and how that interacts with the ability to recover deer.
Uh, and if you want to get into the broader topic of
how it sits in the soil, but mostly
how does it affect the cost
of recovery and where that can happen?
I don't have the data on the cost of recovery.
I mean, we are quite particular about where we use
that poison as opposed to others.
I don't know if Tim, if you've got any detail on that.
So I think, um, as step noted, we, we do want
to be really clear about the outcomes that you're seeking
and the, the impacts
and the, of each of the substances.
And so with something like Theum, um, that has a,
in the environment, it will have an impact on food
security and food recovery.
And so we'll want to think compared,
Just to clarify, it was about, it was about the costs
of recovery and, you know, um, if a,
if a deer cannot be used
with anything except recreational then means there's a lower
cost for it if it can be recovered and solved,
therefore there'd be a higher cost.
What sort of, I'm just asking about the work that doc's done
to look into how much money's being left on the ground
by having these, uh,
poisons used in the way they are not just by doc,
but by regional councils and others.
Sure, sure. We'd have, I think we'd have to information
Yeah, we'd have to come back to you on that.
I mean, another area we are wanting to look into is, um,
a better system for meat recovery as well.
So that's something that we could cover
in a bit more detail. Mm,
Good. Uh, I'm
gonna take one last supplementary, uh,
two last supplementaries on the hunting
discussion, uh, grant.
Okay. Uh, got two subs
or two different costing questions in this space.
So how much is it costing dock, um,
and implementing functions under the Game Animal Council Act
when you're giving things like matters as advice
to landowners, game animal management, advising on wild meat
and social distributions.
Um, when you, and,
and these, when I can understand the, some of the things
that the Gay Animal Council itself is all already
Doing Because they've just texted you,
I think we'd have to come back to you, um,
with some detail on that one as well.
Okay. And the other question which I raised in the
preamble before we had this was I was interested to know
how much this cost the, the pro the Russell Forest Project.
Mm-hmm. I'm really interested to know what
that whole project's costs, um, uh, for the,
I understand we might be down to one deer, I think,
I think yeah, we, I know we brought down to that last,
I mean, Tris is a, is a great case study of a specific
pest eradication project.
And I, I think I did ask for
that information. Have you got that
With you? I don't
think I have you, but again, we can,
we can come back from with that,
Please. Thank
You. Thank you.
We'll go for one last, um,
on this hunting discussion, Rachel,
See if it really is the last sum.
Now I just, uh, thank you for saying that you'll give me
that written answer and
for offering it briefly, and I think that would be useful.
There's obviously lots of interest in it. Mm-hmm.
And just, um, the answer, the answer to your question, um,
from Celia and also Preen when we're talking about
managing conflicts, I just want to check
that we are thinking along the same lines here
because there was some discussion around the table
and that is that ungulates eat the
undergrowth and that's problematic.
Yep. Uh, it's also problematic that there's not the funding
to get rid of all the ungulates.
So it's very helpful if recreational hunters can help
get rid of those ungulates.
And then we have this legislation going
through the house at the moment
where we're gonna protect some of those ungulates
to a certain degree, and there's differences of opinion.
And we've, we saw different submissions
as a select committee about the science of the recovery
of their undergrowth, um, with and without those ungulates.
So I was just checking when you were saying Penny,
that you were, uh, doing some studies, is this work
that Doc is continuing to do in terms of
research on the numbers of those ambulance in a,
on different ecosystems and what, uh, damage
or not damage they do?
Is that, is that correct? And is that the kind of thing
that you could explore more in a future brief?
So, so, absolutely. So in, in terms of, um,
ungulates, we are doing regular monitoring
and data collection on how widespread they are
and the impacts that they are having.
Mm-hmm. Um, so that, that is one whole area
and Steph could talk to you more about that here
and now, should you want to do that.
In terms of the second point, um, we, in terms of the work
that we do with the hunting sector, um, one of the things
that we're, you know, we're,
we are focused on is we're trialing some different ways of,
of managing in particular places.
So for, you know, for example in the es mm-hmm.
Where we, we've got some issues, we've got a hunting, um,
you know, sector who want to do more on that space.
We are trialing how we can, um, do some different ways
of managing and seeing what impacts we get through
how we work with, uh, the hunting sector.
And I think that's a really positive, good,
useful thing to be doing.
And then I think the third one, in terms of the hosey, um,
hosey that are going through at the moment, part
of the advice that Doc will be putting into that is, um,
what is the impact on nature through those, um, proposals
and through some of the areas, um, where we've worked
for a long time with the WY Foundation, for example, one
of the things I've always enjoyed about working
with someone like Roy Sloan is he always wants to know, um,
what, what is the impact on nature?
And if more needs to be done
because things, um, are going backwards,
he has always wanted to have that conversation
and, and do more.
And that has been a longstanding working relationship
that we've had with the Wie Foundation.
And when you look at the results that we are getting there
as compared to other parts
of F Oldland, actually, they're really good.
Thank you. That's great. Thanks. Great to hear. Thanks.
And, and I guess that the, the part of
that question was though the, the work that DOC is planning
to do to continue with that monitoring Yes.
And to continue to make sure that it, I mean, and
'cause we heard the opposite
as well in submissions that, so,
So it's critical that the con So one
of the things I feel incredibly strongly about, so I I,
early on in my career, I was responsible
for environmental reporting at
the ministry for the environment.
And you have to have good monitoring, um, to be able
to make management decisions.
So that, that is why we have continued
to keep investment in the monitoring that we do.
That's right. And as part of, um, we've been doing a lot
of work with the Seeker Foundation.
So as part of a zy you have your herd management plan,
you have to have your operational plan
and a monitoring plan.
And we are to really monitor biodiversity
and there's lots that we wanna learn through this process.
So I think we're all on the same page
that those all numbers need
to come down if you're gonna have a healthier environment
and a better hunting experience as well.
So, um, I feel like there's really good relationship there
and there's a lot we've learned from the WIE situation
as well that we can look at how do we think about, um,
the work that the Sika Foundation would lead as well.
So one of the things we know, as you know,
we do a big suppression program
across the country for predators.
We know how low we need to get predator numbers
for the forest to be and the,
and the, um, birds to be doing okay.
We don't know how much work we need to do sometimes in terms
of dear or go to whatever numbers.
And that's the work we will continue to do, uh,
with other ecologists with the hunting sector as we,
um, do some of this work.
Thank you. Thank you.
Look, I mean, I'm just looking at the time
and we have many other topics on our structured agenda, so,
uh, we might just move on to the next area now,
unless there is any, uh, very pressing question around, uh,
biodiversity from them.
Yes. They want to approach right now. Okay, Rachel? Yeah.
And she didn't get her primary question, so we'll open it up
a general biodiversity question.
Yeah. And it is a general one.
Um, and I'm inviting your comment
at quite a high level here.
Uh, and I, I was very pleased
to hear you talk about climate change
and what that's gonna do in, in terms of,
you also raised the, um, more fire.
So I was wondering if you want to give us a comment on
what happened in Tonga River
and what the impact on biodiversity is there
and what's, what your plan is.
And then also, um, another
broad ranging question is obviously
you report on individual species
and we, we, we see right at the back of the annual report,
um, the threat classification system.
And, but I know you've taken us through
before Steph, um,
that not everything is just related on one space, is
that it is the ecosystem that's really important.
In fact, in your answer you just gave us the, you're saying,
you know, what are the levels of pests
and predators that, that the ecosystem can handle?
Um, so if, if you wanted to make a, any points on
that relationship between ecosystems and species.
And then just one very tiny question
about bats on the last page here at,
there's five different bats species listed,
but then it says six at the bottom.
Oh, wonderful. And I was just wondering why magic one, so
that there's some more questions and one tiny
Specific. Okay. So look, I'm, I'm
gonna hand to Henry on fire
because we have been doing a lot of work, um, in,
in this space over the, the last year
because of what we are seeing
and just the volume of fires we're having to deal with
as compared to previously.
So I'll get Henry to cover that.
So we got hit, um, pretty hard last year in terms
of fire season Con Marino, uh, mass pass, um,
coral Man, and a range of other smaller fires.
And it's just, it's the growing recognition essentially
that fire is potentially one
of the most major biodiversity threats we've got.
Mm-hmm. And, and I think we would probably be the, the first
to say when, when the FES transition took place, sort
of 2017, 2018, um, some
of the supporting players in fire,
which we are one of them mm-hmm.
Um, forestry companies are, are another, um,
probably dropped back a little bit from fire
responsibilities as, as legal
responsibility handed over to fans.
Um, but over the last two
or three years, we are investing a considerable amount in,
in lifting our capability.
Um, so lifting the capability of our people, um, replacing,
replenishing our, our, uh, our PDE and our,
and our basic firefighting equipment
because what's happening as, as fires hit conservation land
or, or any other rural space,
um, Fs need our help.
Um, so we are in beside them now.
Um, and as fires get under control, FS will move on
and we will pick up the fire grounds, um, so critical
that we've retain and build our capability.
But what, what happened at Toro?
Look, there's still work to be done, um, in terms of cause
and, and, and the range of investigations that'll go on,
but incredibly fast and incredibly hot.
Mm-hmm. Um, our fire people say really almost off the scale
in terms of the heat of the, of the fire, um, you know,
there's sort of a scale which comes outta the US and Canada.
This was right up there.
Um, so look, you've seen the damage about 3000 hectares.
Yeah. It, it will recover,
but it will recover, um, only with considerable, um,
work done really on, on weed control and browse control.
Um, because first things
to move in on the far ground will be the in invasive weeds.
So it, it's gonna be a number of years of, of weed control
and browser control.
Um, and the land will recover in time. Is
It quite expensive?
Um, yeah, look, we are, we are,
we are doing the work at the moment on costing it somewhere
probably up towards a million a year.
Um, and terms of weed
and control probably for a five to 10 year period.
And one of the things, Rachel, that we're doing is, um, as
events like that are happening is we've got our biodiversity
experts alongside our fire experts.
So as we are working with f on the response,
we can be really clear about, um, where,
where there are really special things, so you might need
to take a particular action versus where, um, in terms of
where, um, things are burning, you've got more of
that particular ecosystem elsewhere so that we can, um,
you know, just be as responsive as, as we can, um, in,
in those, um, immediate incidences that we're
Dealing with. And we're using,
um, drones to kind of get a sense of the,
um, base
and then we'll do that regulated,
be able to look at the recovery.
Um, but the other thing I should say is some
of our teams on the ground are thoroughly enjoying showing
us the seedlings of some very rare plants
coming back already.
So it's pretty amazing.
Um, and we are also doing work with, um, NZTA Waka
to try and manage some of the local we sources.
So you'd like try and get them out of the way now.
So there's a lot of good action, um,
with UA on the ground happening at the moment.
Um, shall I carry on to your other questions?
So, so you are right. I mean, all the stuff we, it's, it's,
it's an interesting one to talk about
ecosystems versus species.
'cause of course ecosystems are made up of species. Mm-hmm.
Um, I think, um, the reality of where we are often at is
for many of the species that we look at
that are in the most trouble, um,
improving their ecosystem will be part of what we need
to do to help them recover.
Mm-hmm. But sometimes it's also kept a rearing
and a whole lot of other stuff that we,
and this is where we partner with so many others like zoos
and sanctuaries and others to figure out what else we need
to do to support their recovery.
So the reason we kind of pull out species separately is
'cause we've got so many that are kind of in the ICU
that need that really specialist care.
Um, it does tend to be a lot of our fauna, a lot
of our lizards and, um, birds and invertebrates.
Um, but we've got a lot of really special ecosystems
that we need to try and do enough work to manage as well.
And then that of course, um,
supports a wider range of species.
So it's hardened biodiversity, there's no perfect way
to chop it up, but we are kind of calling out
that those ones need that really special attention.
Do, do you worry with the more reliance on private funding
that, that will go towards, um, is
human behavior might say that we like to focus on, you know,
species by species rather than thinking
of a more complicated ecosystem in the, um, the inputs into
that ecosystem, which might be
Mentation, Et cetera. I think
One of the things I've always found interesting in the
biodiversity role is a lot of people think that we just need
to do predator free and we'll be fine,
or we just need to save the kakapo and we'll be fine.
And with the tool like Bio Invest,
it's helped us tell the scale of the story
of the different things.
I try and make it my mission
to get people really excited about invertebrates.
Um mm-hmm. But also if, if someone is really excited
and wants to put money into the kakapo, which means
that some of that money that we had there we
can put into the other thing.
Sure. So I think now that we have a tool,
we can look across what's coming in
and put it in the, in the best place.
Um, but there's lots of people
who get excited about bizarre little rare
plants and all sorts of things.
So I just think we tell a much better story than we've
told in the past about, again,
And, and the other thing that I think is really useful
as a senior leadership team with that tool is, um, each year
as we are working about out where to allocate our budget,
we can now use the tool to show us
what happens if you put more in pest control
or, you know, species management here or so.
And, and we can deliberately make those choices and,
and see what the trade offs are in a way
that we couldn't do in the past.
Just a funny sub to that in on your tool, um,
does it look though, uh, I'm sorry,
I can't remember at external factors.
So if you're looking at the ho ho habit,
does it look at sediment runoff?
Does it look at, um, the fishing effort,
those issues as well that are out well
outside of dock control?
Yeah. So we'll capture what we do know is having an impact
and we'll make some judgements about that.
It's also so mentioned we've assessed over a thousand
species for the impact of climate change.
So we factored that in as well.
So to the best that we can, we try
and capture all of the threats.
But what we are really also trying to
cost is what would it take?
So if you take something like Hoho, there's a bunch
of things that we can control and a bunch of things
because of climate change and other things that we can't.
Mm-hmm. So what can we do to manage people's behavior
around nesting habitat?
What can we do with predator control?
So it helps us figure out what's the suite of interventions
that we can take to have the best impact as
Well. Yeah. Bird of the
Year last year. Thank
You. Look,
Melissa had a supplementary question on that.
It was on bio, um, diversity.
I I I I'm just really quite concerned about the freshwater
gold clam that was first discovered in 2023.
And I just read, saw a story
that popped up on radio New Zealand effectively saying
that it could potentially impact on water, uh, supply
for millions.
I mean, are you doing anything about it?
I mean, what's the, uh, what's the issue
and um, can you eat it?
So yeah, I just saw that article today too.
I didn't know about that research.
So NPI is the lead agency
'cause it's a, it's a biosecurity risk.
We support in terms of, um,
technical advice on likely biodiversity impact,
particularly, um, sometimes the nature
of a controlling mechanism can have a
big impact on biodiversity.
Uh, we, because we've got a lot of outreach
around the country, we support them getting their messaging
around out there about people, you know, checking
and cleaning their boats and all of that kind of stuff.
So, uh, NPI is working with the local council around, um,
that, that new discovery in Taranaki
and we are there in a supporting function to then.
Yeah. And I'll just add to that.
So I, I was at a, um, business sector event a week ago,
and, um, PricewaterhouseCoopers was talking about a study
that they're just about to release,
and it was looking at, it's aligned with work
that's been done in the uk
and it's looking at risks
to our natural assets in New Zealand.
Um, what surprised them through that work was
with the climate changing, just the scale of pests
and disease that we can expect, um, the New Zealand economy
to be, have to deal with, um, and over the next decade.
So, um, we are due to catch up with them very shortly
and I, I, I just think
that's gonna be a really important report for, um, us
as a country to, to look at
because we, we are seeing more pests
and disease that we're having to, you know, to deal with.
And that, that's why we work incredibly closely with MPI,
um, as, as those things, you know, come to the fore.
Uh, so that might be quite a good, um,
way into my question actually that I had
because, um, you know, reading
that biodiversity contributes 57 billion to the economy,
which is obviously about 27% of GDP.
How do you quantify that data
and, you know, how do you value this?
I suppose?
So we, we work with, um, economic experts
who, you know, do those calculations for us
because, um, that they, they have that expertise.
But I think that the reason we got it done is
because quite, quite often, I think, um,
with a, a lot of assets that you would think about and,
and as a business, um, you, you would invest in.
So like, you know, if you had a a factory, you'd,
you'd be looking at depreciation on your capital.
But when you're dealing with natural assets,
we don't have a history of doing that in, in New Zealand.
So we had that work done just to demonstrate that they,
they do have big economic value, um,
and that we need to be thinking about how we invest in them
so they can keep contributing the economic
value that they do.
And it's something that we'll do from time to time as doc
with N-Z-I-E-R.
So we can just keep a,
a handle on whether those assets are tracking
up or down, but
What types of areas do you factor into those figures?
So is that kind of a trade relationships?
Is that our tourism sector, is that, um,
our domestic tourism?
What, like what is, what's factoring into the, to that, um,
big number figure that big figure, what,
where does it, where does it come from?
Yeah, and I, I think there's a full range
and we'll, we'll call Peter up.
Um, it, it could be, um, energy production,
it could be tourism, could be, um,
reduction of sedimentation.
You know, for example, if in the headwaters, um,
of a catchment, um, it's, well,
the sediment's well protected,
it may require a lot less st dredging of a harbor.
There's a direct economic benefit of
of having a healthy ecosystem.
And look, my, my figures could be a little bit wrong in
terms of the impacts of Gabriel, um,
but the, the loss of sedimentation, um,
and the damage it caused, the lost productive value
and the damage was somewhere, I think up around $2 billion.
And from areas where there was healthy forest cover,
it's about 90% protected.
So you start doing the maths on some of that stuff
and you start seeing the value.
Yeah, it's contribution of fresh water.
Um, it is flood protection, um, it is carbon. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you. And Celia, one last question
and then, uh, we're gonna move on.
Yeah. Um, and that of course relates
to the whole cost benefit analysis
and how we put that into government
as a whole, which will be interesting.
But what I wanted to look at was,
and I'm so dying to be able to play with the Bio Invest tool
and it's available, but does it, how long does it look out?
And if you look at those four threats you identified, um,
the wildling pilings, the pests, the ungulates, you know,
diseases and so on, does it have any analysis on
which it would be a lot cheaper to deal with once
and for all as it were?
Um, and which will always have ongoing cost site,
if you could go span Predator 3 20 50, we don't have to deal
with rats anymore versus, um,
protecting our coastal waters against new threats,
that would be a different, a different thing.
And just interesting
what timeframe you are looking at over bio invest.
I'm gonna do an initial answer, but I might get Tim
to, to jump up.
So some of the ones like, well,
and Confi of course NPI has done an incredibly good, um,
cost benefit analysis over that.
So some of those where we know you've got a manual control
technique, if you had the funding
and you hit it hard up front, yes you'd be, you know,
you'd be well ahead of it.
Other things like, um, predator Free,
we don't have all the tools we need to get large areas free
and keep them free yet.
And we are really hoping, whether it's Genetech
or something else, but we are, you know,
we're not necessarily gonna toxin
and trap our way to predator free 2050.
Like we are hopeful of a big science breakthrough.
So for some of those things, um, we don't,
even if we throw all the money at the world, you know, a lot
of that is, we are still dependent on some kind
of breakthrough, whereas others we will have a control
technique that if we had the scale,
and I guess a good example is something like Sea Spurge
where we've got IVL funding
and we've, we're getting ahead of the game
where we've got people around the country pulling
that out on beaches
because that'll be the next coner of the beaches.
So, you know, it is, if you can get in early,
it certainly helps
Look. Thank you very
much. Uh, we are gonna take a break now.
Um, and then we will move on to the predatory discussions.
So, uh, we will return at four 15.
Lovely thank you
for the annual review of the Department of Conservation.
Um, and on our structured agenda, uh,
the next item is the Predator Free 2050 strategy.
So, uh, I'd like to open up to members
for any questions they may have on, uh, predator
free, Elia, Wade Brown.
Go for it. Thank you very much.
Um, I, I'm interested in how
after 90% of the submissions were in favor
of adding feral caps to the strategy, um,
the department recommended
and the minister accepted the decision to add, which is, um,
I think a very good thing.
But how will the existing funding be able
to manage the addition
of a fifth species?
Uh, so we are already doing research on feral cats.
So the department, um,
we are already working into looking into some different, uh,
toxins that we would want to use for feral cats.
Um, more on, you know, public conservation land.
So we all look into, um, you know, the future budget,
understand what different, um,
community projects want, et cetera.
And as we look at the pots that we have available, um,
we will think about where we best put that money.
What we heard from a lot of people is what they're really
interesting and is, you know, the trapping techniques,
et cetera, that they need in the more urban environments.
Their ability to, uh, educate others,
not just about feral cats,
but about companion animals and all of that kind of stuff.
And the role that where they might
wanna get their own funding.
They felt that having feral cats on the list would really
help them, um, attract funding.
'cause a lot of our, um, community groups are incredibly
successful at bringing in funding for research,
for control, for all sorts of things.
Um, and we will look to the future of our, um, tools
to market and those kind of things, um,
that Tim runs and think about.
How do you incentivize others to, to come in
and put in bids for, uh, more control for feral cats.
But we do have some tools in the toolkit
and some things that we are developing as well.
Um, just following on from that, the,
you make a good point about education
and presumably responsible cat ownership.
Um, is the,
given the feral cat is now in the 2050 strategy,
will that, um, make you consider whether
or not registering
and microchipping domestic cap should be compulsory?
So that's not, um, necessarily the mandate
of the department to do that?
We don't have or not to do it, no.
But, um, recommend, I think it would, you know, it'll lead
to conversations about, um, whether that is a good option.
Um, councils already do quite a lot of it, as you will know
through bylaws
and things, particularly around microchipping.
I I think the thing about the, um, adding cats
to Predator Free is,
unlike the things someone else mentioned
before, the things we don't want,
we will likely always have cats in New Zealand
because they're important, uh, companion animals for people.
So we are trying to carve out those ones
that are in the environments where we really don't want them
and think about how we work with communities
and the different tools that we might have available.
So we are hopeful over the next period it'll open up a
broader conversation.
Councils will be a really key part of that
because they have a lot of the key levers.
And pre, uh, just
before we go, the primary, uh,
Cameron has a sub on the cat think
It was just, uh, it was just about the, the, the ability
to get permits, um, to track in the bush.
There's been recent news articles about, uh, um, people
who try and get out there
and kill things like including cats, uh,
having trouble getting sign off to do that in a,
in a permitted way by Department of Conservation.
And yet you should be congratulated on the, uh, ability
to get a hunting permit is now really easy.
Is there any work in trying to get, um, a,
a trapping permit, um, streamlined system? Mm,
Uh, I just actually had some advice come for me
to look at on that today actually.
So, um, you'll know we are trying
to fix our permission system across the board.
We've had, um, some good early wins
with our hunting permit system.
We do need to look at how we're gonna
expand some of that stuff out.
So we haven't made a decision on that,
but it's something we can,
it's been brought to my
attention. It's something we can look at.
And thank you for the feedback on the hunting system
we're, we are hearing
that people love it and it's a lot easier.
So really good to have that in place.
And preen. Thank you. I've got a few questions.
Um, just on credited free 2050 sort of more broadly,
um, one of which is, I mean, given
that Predict Free 2050 Limited has now been, um,
wound down keen to hear a little bit
around the transition there into doc, um, how that's going,
what staff transfers have happened,
how many roles have transferred over from the company into,
um, into doc.
Uh, and also, I mean,
we've traversed ad nauseum at this select committee,
the funding challenges that Doc faces.
Um, and given that this was a cost saving, uh, Mesha,
how will Doc, um,
I guess navigate those funding challenges there specifically
with pre free Limited being folded into to doc?
That's one question. I have a second question
around the tech because, um, part of from memory, part
of the reason for establishing, uh, predator Free Limited
was the signs, the tick, the development of tools there.
And I'm just looking at, um,
what you've outlined in your annual report on page 34
around Predator Free
and you've, um, named some of the tools in Tick
that Doc is using to achieve predator control.
There are those tools in tech
that have come from Predator Free Limited,
I think you've mentioned four
or five specifically four new tools that were introduced.
And I just wanna know whether there's anything outstanding.
Was there tech specific types of tech?
Were there tools that P Free Limited was in the process of,
um, developing when they were wound down?
And if so, what's happened to that?
So I'll start and then hand to Steph.
So, um, first of all, I just would like
to acknowledge the board of the company, predator Free 2050,
and their staff, they were phenomenal to work with
as the transition occurred, um, into the Department
of Conservation, um, that could not have gone better.
Everyone worked really well. So I'm grateful for that.
Um, in terms of, uh, the work that we've done since then,
we have been incredibly deliberate, um,
about really getting out
and meeting the different, um, projects that came in, um,
through the Predator Free 2050 work so that we,
we really understand, um,
what those projects feel like they need
to continue to be successful.
And the feedback that I'm getting, um, is that, that that,
that, that is going, um, incredibly well.
Um, and then I'll, I'll hand Steph anything
further that you want to add?
Yeah, so just in terms of the, um, transition, we,
you know, we spend a lot of time working with the teams.
We've had a, um, couple of the team, uh, come over
and there's some of the board members
will continue to work with us.
They're gonna lead workstream, um,
and some of the Predator Free strategy work.
So there's, um, a lot of them who are in the Predator Free,
uh, company environment are also on Predator free Wellington
or, you know, they're involved, uh, in other ways.
And so they will keep that, uh, institutional knowledge
in terms of the, um, savings aspect.
The funding that went back was the funding that paid for
the employees of the company
and, you know, paying for the board, the funding to support,
whether it be the 18 landscape projects
or the RDNI contracts that they have all came across to us.
And there was a really huge, um, piece
of work on innovation, which is a term I had not heard of
before, uh, to bring all of those contracts over to us
and we will, we will honor those contracts.
And then, um, the, the base funding that came
with those will continue so we can look at
that into, into the future.
Um, and so we are trying to work really closely with them
to understand what they need
and we are, um, resetting, uh, the team it sits in
to really think about how we set ourselves up differently
because our role,
while we've had a leadership role in Predator Free,
the company was leading the urban
and rural, um, projects, including the tech side of that,
and we were leading on the public
conservation land side of that.
So that's all in one place now.
And so, uh, in terms of the tech there, uh,
ongoing contracts that they've brought across,
there'll be technology that they helped develop
that is being used.
And then we've got our tools to market tech
and there's a whole lot of, um, uh, innovation
that we've come up within there.
And then one of the key things is making sure
that the knowledge transfer across all the different
projects and ways of operating is happening.
So that's one of the things we really focused on as well.
So given that then Limited was focusing on urban
and rural land
and Dock on public conservation land, um,
and they did sort of the tech side of things
that was presumably quite different
from Dock's focus as well.
Did you, have you found in the process
of this transition any areas of duplication of work
between DOC and Productively Limited
before it was sort of folded into doc?
I think there's lots of areas that are really
complimentary in the way that we're going about things.
So we always did research planning together.
Um, there's a, we had a lot of ways
that we governed together to understand
what we were each doing.
Um, there's companies like Zero Invasive Predators
who are doing work in the public, um, conservation land.
They're also being supporting Predator Free Wellington.
So I think a really good outcome is where we do get that,
um, cross pollination across the different areas
where you're trying to learn different things.
So, um, we were doing similar
tasks in different environments.
Okay. So no overlaps that you've had to now stop
because of the amalgamation between,
I think the main overlap
or efficiency you would gain is you'd each have a HR shop
and a, you know, you'd have a lot of support functions.
And so we've got, you know,
the wider department will provide a lot of support
to whatever we need more broadly
and predator free as they have done
for the bits we were always doing. Just
The last set one you said to freeze specifically, um,
based on the public consultation that you've just, um,
undertaken, do you have any key insights
that are emerging from that?
I mean, presumably some
of the feral cat stuff will be part of it.
Um, but anything else that you can share with the committee
around what's come out of that?
I think when you see that we got, you know,
well over three and a half thousand submissions and,
and really, uh, deep insightful submissions, um,
the access to the good, good technology
and particularly in urban environments,
cheaper ways of doing things.
Like we've actually got some amazing technology out there,
but a lot of communities can't necessarily afford all of it.
Yeah. The ability to just share knowledge across the system.
And I think that capability building piece,
like making sure, particularly with Jobs
for Nature finishing, there's a lot of,
there's 9,000 community trapping, um,
groups across New Zealand.
There's a huge number
of New Zealanders who've participated in trapping.
So just helping keep the support there to,
to keep the momentum of that going.
I think momentum is one
of the key things people are interested in.
Mm. And those kind of, what are the research breakthroughs
and things like that, but like anything pretty, like a lot
of varied, um, feedback as well of course.
But I think the exciting thing is the huge value
that communities get out of being involved and predator free
and making sure, 'cause
of course the announcement about the company came out during
that process mm-hmm.
Making sure that it keeps, um,
high profile in the department
and with ministers that it doesn't get kind of, um,
absorbed elsewhere in the department, you know,
and sort of loses its momentum.
So making sure it just has that, um, high profile
and continues to have a lot
of strong leadership from senior
levels through to on the ground.
Thank, and Celia, you had Aary. Thank you.
Um, yes, following on from that, so I've got a couple
of questions about budget three.
Um, I think there were, is it 18 large landscape projects?
Mm-hmm. Um, and I was sort of intimately involved
with a couple of them now from memory Predatory 2050 Limited
actually provided, um, to that organization
to predatory Wellington, some of the background, um,
you know, the treasury management type functions
and accounting and all of those.
Have those now been taken over by DOC
or have they been handed back to the 18?
I don't know how many of them had that shared role
with creditor free 2050 limited,
but presumably it wasn't just one.
Yeah, so we've been working through with, um, the leads
of each of those, um, of those projects to understand
what the arrangements were, what they might need.
So the teams will have been working that through as part of
that kind of innovation process and how it works.
The other thing we often hear that, um, they want support
with is fundraising support and just approaches to, um, tips
and tricks for, for doing that.
So, um, one of the things we're very conscious
of is they've had a dedicated company supporting them.
We're setting ourselves up
and trying to get, uh, a refreshed a kind
of different team in place
to make sure we've got the right outreach
and support at place as well
as the current team that we have.
Um, and so we're just trying to keep the momentum momentum
up so people still feel they have all of that support.
So I'm not sure exactly about that detailed one,
but we could, we could find
Out, it'll be interesting to see at the next review stage
how comfortable those projects are with the transition.
So yes, that's right. But um,
the other one was the still remains, um,
as a different entity, predator Free New Zealand Trust.
Mm-hmm. There's the catchment collectives, um,
there's Land Care, um, QE two, a lot
of other organizations, um, mountains to Sea,
um, and many of them in one place or another.
Um, work on that Predator Free strategy.
How can we, you've wrapped, um,
predator Free 2050 limited into the do stable if you like,
but how do you work with those organizations
are going to remain separate?
What's your strategy for working with them to again,
support them so they do what they do best?
Yeah, absolutely. So there's, there's a huge number
of different entities involved.
So we've got a steering group at the moment with a number
of the, um, a number
of individuals including the Predator Free Trust,
who do a phenomenal job in really connecting New Zealanders
to the Predator Free Mission.
And we, um, work really closely with them.
So we've got a steering group that they've been helping us
with the strategy development.
Once the strategy is released early in the new year,
we are gonna have a series of, um, work streams
where we will, you know, invite different
people in to support us.
There'll be, it won't be doc leading all of those.
It'll be a mix of others leading those.
And that'll be across things like your RD
and I work, um, how do you keep up your knowledge transfer?
You know, there'll be various streams of work
and so that will be an opportunity.
Um, we also have quite a lot of comms that we put out
and we are working really closely with the trust on
how do we think about how we consistently communicate out.
They've got massive reach, uh,
and then we've got a different reach.
So we're just trying to look at those
communication channels as well.
So really important. So
Work in progress and we look forward to hearing more.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Look, just staying on Predator Free, um,
doc obviously has invested, uh, money into, uh,
the technology and the innovation
around detecting predators.
Um, I think with, uh, cameras
and quite high tech, uh, trapping systems.
Yeah. Could you just elaborate a little further on some
of those systems that you have in place
to improve efficiency, um,
and obviously streamline your, um, predator control?
Yeah, so, um, there's a lot we're trying to do
to get really innovative in our bait development.
So that's about new bait.
So at the moment, particularly if we're trying to get, uh,
the mu the Stokes Weasels ferrets
or cats, we're getting them
through secondary poisoning of rats.
So we, instead of the cereal baits, we want
to have a meat sausage, a green sausage,
because we would wanna get the cats and stokes directly.
We've gotta go through a, um, you know, a process
with EPA and others on that.
But we, and you can actually then be quite efficient in
how you deploy that as well.
So we also look about how do you get the, um,
application level right?
Because to manage the amount
of toxins we are putting into the environment.
Um, and so there's a lot going into better toxins.
There's been huge effort into, um, AI systems.
So we have, um, amazing camera technology that
with really much cleverer people than me
who build all the code
and it can recognize all the things
that's really good on the mainland.
So if you're zero invasive predators, you want
to know if you're boundaries, you know, being penetrated.
Um, but equally with, um, islands,
it's helping us respond a lot quicker than we
would've, uh, in the past.
Uh, we are also doing research, um, with EDNA
to better understand rat diets.
So different rat species respond
differently to different toxins.
So we are trying to understand more
with zero invasive predators, how we actually make sure
that we're, we're getting the rats.
Um, and so yeah, there's a huge amount of effort going in
where we are being a lot smarter than we used to be.
Um, and then of course, beyond Predator Free,
there's a whole lot we are doing, um,
we're doing the Hog Gone Pig trial, uh, where we hog gone.
Say that again. Yeah, hog gone. Oh, goodbye. Hogie.
Um, where we, it's like a,
You talking about the minister?
No, you're what hog gone. That's terrible. Um,
Well, you know, you bring the animals in,
they get a free feed for a while
and then you'll act them with the toxins.
So we want that for Marco H****r.
Uh, a lot of effort going, um, into, uh, cats.
And then of course, the area that we are most interested in
as well at the moment is we don't have good tools for mice
and hedgehogs and they, no, we don't, uh,
have quite a big impact on our
pollinators, our seed disperses.
Um, and so there's a lot
that we are interested in there as well.
So, um, yeah, we, we put a lot of effort along
with others into keeping learning
how to get ahead of the game really.
And is that, um, technology
and innovation something that you can partner with some
of the private sector organizations?
Absolutely. And you volunteer base to kind of, you know,
power up the predator control?
Yes. And that's why we have, um, our program
and, uh, the company had a similar one called Tools
to Market that, um, Tim runs.
'cause the idea is how do you enable yes, uh,
commercial entities to develop something
that they can then yeah.
Take to market. And often what we develop here is
of great international interest.
Mm, absolutely.
Look, we've got a couple of subs on this grant.
Yeah. I just, I'll ask this about the specific technology.
Um, last time we had during around the,
the Spitfire technology.
Oh yeah. Where's, where's that at?
I should have come back ready on Spitfire.
'cause you asked me last time. I, I'll,
I'll swat up on Spitfire.
The reason I ask about, it's
because I've got a local, um, persons into all this predator
Ready and, and he was very excited
by the potential of it. Yeah.
Okay. I'm gonna Spit
and Cameron ton's got No, it's fine.
Yeah, you're all good. Okay. Called but brilliant.
Look, we, we will move on to, um,
our next item on the structured agenda, um,
to the visitor experience, uh, which is very exciting,
uh, and the international visitor level
and how, um, the funding is used
because obviously this was a discussion
that we had, uh, last time.
And so, um, I'd like to open it up for members questions,
uh, around the visitor experience
and the amazing work that DOC is doing, uh,
in this area. Brown,
Where can I start?
Um, I've got two quite different angles of questioning,
so if I may go for it chair, I'll go for the IVL one first,
and then once we've dealt with our IVL,
I might come back on volunteer organizations.
Okay. Um, so the IVL, um, the
law changed as to what it could be used for slightly.
Um, and I've asked about what proportion
of the IVL goes to conservation.
I've been told it's 50% of that 50.
Um, is that after the marketing has been spent or
before the marketing has
Been spent? So I'll
run you through how, how it works. Thank you.
And Peter, I'll have you
as my backup in case I don't get it.
Absolutely perfect. But, um,
so the way it works is the revenue that comes in, 50% goes
to conservation, 50% goes to tourism.
Um, in terms of the discretionary new investment,
it's, there's 55 million per annum for new projects,
um, for conservation.
And that is baselined.
And the projects are agreed annually
through an investment plan by IVL ministers on that.
And then in terms of revenue over
and above, um, that it fluctuates, depends on,
depending on how much that comes in,
but 50% will go into vote conservation
and it's allocated to services for conservation in that, um,
multi-category appropriation.
It funds general conservation activities
and it automatically results in a
reduction in crown funding.
So it's essentially a swap.
So as soon as the money comes in from, I don't know,
300 Chinese tourism, not a person, it then
if that 150 just being really simplistic
and talking about one visitor that 150 gets cut in half,
well presumably there is some admin first, then what's left,
some will go to adopt.
And if it ends up, say being 65,
after that 65 will
directly replace other adopt funding,
which goes back in the general pool.
So it's never, it's not additional.
It's never additional, never additional.
So there's 55 million per annum
that is new money for projects.
Um, and then the other money that's over
and above that 50% goes to conservation,
50% goes to tourism.
And that is a budget swap. A baseline
Swap. So going back
to my hypothetical Chinese visitor
that comes in, if they're the first Chinese visitor
of the year as it were, um, then all of that gets divided up
and all of that would go to towards that first 55 million
for new projects on the tourism half.
If they were the last Chinese visitor of the year,
when you've already got your 55 million, then
that money would go back into the consolidated fund.
Is that right? Since Yeah, essentially it swaps out.
So, so it's not a total swap.
It's only a swap after 45 minutes. Thank you.
That's, that's, that's clarified that.
Um, I'll go to thank other people, go
and then I'll come back, um, go to Priyanka.
Um, thank you.
I've got a few questions around, um, just the mechanics
of that, I guess, um, and I'll start there.
So the 55 million is baselined
and it's for specific new projects.
Um, so my first question is what kind of planning
has Doc done for, I guess in the event
of something like COVID where visitor visitor
numbers drop significantly.
Um, and given that this is baseline, how are you going
to manage that?
And secondly, you mentioned that the projects
that get funding through the $55 million pot
will be decided on by ministers.
What role does do play in terms of advice that's
provided to ministers and what is the criteria, if any,
for projects that get that funding?
Yep. So I'll start with the, the last piece first.
So, um, so we have very deliberately
focused on providing more strategic advice about
what the international visitor levy could be used for.
Yeah. Um, and what we are looking to have is 60% of it for,
um, projects for nature and 40% for visitors.
In terms of the projects for nature, we use bio invests, um,
as the basis to look at what,
what will have the biggest impact, um, for nature in places
that visitors are likely to go.
And then for the visitor experience, we look at
where are visitors going, um, where we might need, um,
infrastructure improvement so that, um, they can sustain
what, what visitors are doing.
So we provide, uh, very detailed
strategic advice over a number of years
into ministers, um, on that.
And that has largely been, um, accepted.
And I think it is enabling a,
a more strategic approach, uh, to that.
And the, um, objectives that we're looking for in terms
of the IVL are very complimentary to
what the department's looking to achieve.
So, for example, ensuring the impact of visitors, um,
on nature is managed that visitors get to experience nature,
they come to see, um,
and that they contribute to that experience. Hmm.
So that's the criteria. Yeah. Okay.
Um, just going back to the quantum
and of the total and then the 55 million, that's baselined
and then the additional on top of that, um, can you give us,
I mean now that's, so that's what,
it's been more than a year since that change, uh,
the top up, the increase in IVL happened.
Mm-hmm. What, what amounts are we talking about here?
What, what is, what is the total amount that is coming
through the, the new IVL and what has been forecast?
So every year we, um, at the moment we have 33 million
for biodiversity projects
and 22 million for visitor projects.
So we've allocated that out for 24, 25, and 25, 26.
And now that we have more certainty of that number,
we are doing a longer term plan
that we will present to the minister.
Because a lot of these things, particularly visitor stuff,
runs over many years.
So we are gonna present a longer term plan.
So, sorry, I probably wasn't very clear
in terms of what I was asking.
So the 55 million each to conservation
and tourism comes out of the total figure that
that will be revenue that's brought in from IBL alone.
What is the forecast for each year for that figure? Oh,
The actual overall forecast,
I think it's 190 million, um, currently.
Okay. But obviously that
fluctuates depending on the number of visitors.
So that gets updated, um, annually.
So just a up on that,
because obviously international tourism numbers have, uh,
you know, really increased, uh,
over the past six to 12 months.
So does your forecast change given that, obviously
that's gonna bring through
More. So, so we don't do
the forecasting
because what, what we get is the 55 million, you know,
for those new projects.
And then anything that's over
and above that they swap out with that our baseline.
So we just focus on the 55 million. Yeah. So,
So for argument's sake, if, um, in a year
the IVL brought in 190 million mm-hmm.
110 of that will be ba the baseline 55 each
for conservation and tourism.
Yeah. And then the 80 million
that's left over would be 40 40, um, conservation
and tourism that's swapped out.
Yes. Yeah. Okay.
So it makes no, so it makes no difference to those areas.
Will it, will it this
because it's the government that's, have you
Got a further question, Prita?
Yes, I do have, um,
some actually, why don't you go to someone else. Okay.
Just while you were thinking about that,
I might just jump in quickly with a question
because I'm quite interested to know, um,
I suppose the money that you do get from the international
visitor levy, uh, in terms of being able to spend it on, uh,
improving huts tracks, uh, how are you able to invest
that back to improve, uh, the outcomes?
Yeah, so we, um, so as Penny, um, mentioned the objectives
and they're particularly focused on, um, high visitor areas.
So whether that be national parks
or other areas where we know a lot of visitors go.
And so it's been, um, really helped us.
We've invested in more short walks and day hikes
and improving the quality of those.
'cause we know that's what, um, a lot of New Zealanders
and internationals want to experience more of.
Uh, we've been able to put funding into things like the
Toro Alpine crossing.
We've already started some work in Milford.
So, uh, and of course we are able to get, um,
cathedral Cove open again
and we are doing some further work there on, uh,
other tracks in the area.
Um, and it's also just helped us with some amenities
and really good experiences in different areas, including,
uh, how people access some of our marine reserves
that come up in our top 10 most visited places as well.
So, um, it's made a big difference for us to be able
to do a lot more at those really popular visitor sites.
Uh, in terms of biodiversity, uh, it's, uh, supplemented
and, and what's given us further funding for goat
and deer control and management, including working
with the hunting sector in some areas, um,
more predator control.
Um, and so what we're trying to think about there is
that if you, if people are coming to visit national parks
and areas, we want them to have a really great experience
of the wildlife there.
So we've gotta invest for them to see healthy forest, uh,
forest, what is a forest?
Forest and, um, new species, you've got another hour to go
spitfire anyway, uh, good times.
Yeah. So we really want them to have
that, that good experience.
And, um, of course, um, supported the work
that Sia talked about earlier with Mobilize,
and it's helped us get underway, um, for the Mokoka Mokoka,
Auckland Island eradication as well,
and supported, um, the Nui operation on,
which is super exciting.
Mm, fantastic. So, um, we are very
good at spending the 55 million bucks
And Elia we Brown.
Thank you very much. Um,
and that, that does help it be interesting
to have some budget conversations with the minister about,
um, at least putting a rising curve along the allocation,
but that's not unfortunate within your, um, possibilities.
But I was interested in particularly the, the things
that are within tourism, within the actual
infrastructure, the hus, the trails, I think the toilets,
water tanks, all of those sorts of things.
Um, which is what part of
that 22 million will go towards as I understand it.
Um, how effective has it been working with, um,
two organizations I know of, um,
and there may be many more the Backcountry HU Trust
and the Greater Wellington Backcountry Network.
Yeah. And, and do they, I mean, doc seems to support them
to some extent, and then they go off and do their own thing.
How, how does that work at a strategic level?
Do they go to the huts you want them to go to?
So both of them are phenomenal partnerships
and, um, so my, my family personally do does a lot
of tramping in the, and the work that the volunteers through
that regional council, um, entity that you talked about
that they do on on Tracks is absolutely phenomenal.
And as a department, we're incredibly
grateful for the work that they do.
Um, in terms of the, the backcountry trust, again,
we have a really constructive partnership with them.
Um, we are working really well together to focus on
what they do versus what we do and,
and looking at how we build up, we, what we do
with them over time, um, depending on, you know,
when they're, they're ready to take on more.
Yeah. And, um, we, so there was IVL funding
provided, sorry I missed that off my list.
Um, so there was 4.2 million of IVL funding
for the community hub program over four years.
And, um, it's quite phenomenal what they do.
So since, um, 2017 they've restored over 300 huts
and 1200 kilometers of walking
and mountain bike tracks from PCL.
So they're a critical part of the system. Yeah.
I went and had a look for myself along the, um, holdsworth
to, to flat, but it's a
Great improvement. Very
good. Thank you. Look, we are going to move on
to the next item on our agenda,
otherwise we won't be able to get
through the structured agenda
unless you have a very, uh, important pressing question.
Prianca on the IV while we there. Okay. Yeah.
The visitor experience. Okay.
On the visitor experience, we're just gonna,
one last question on visitor
Experience. It's just, it's just some,
um, some feedback
that I've received from a couple of peoples massive,
but that there is, um, there's a fair bit of focus
for obvious reasons on the large, on the great walks, on the
tourist visitor experiences versus the local visitor
experiences, and
therefore it's at the detriment of some of the smaller, um,
you know, tracks and things that haven't been maintained.
Are you able to give us a bit of a split between the two
and what dots focus on the, some
of the local visitor experience?
Um, has been?
So look, I I think one of the pieces of work
that we are doing at the moment that is, is really important
and it's based off research of what people want
to do both New Zealanders
and international visitors, is we are,
we are really looking at, we,
what are people saying about the
experiences they want to do?
And then how do we align our investment to that?
And what, what's really coming through clearly as, um,
Steph mentioned earlier is people are wanting to do more to,
to do shorter walk walks.
Um, we are, we are really looking at, we, we need
to have more on the north island in terms of where a lot
of the population is.
So, uh, over time we'll be planning for how do we shift some
of where our focus is into what, what people want to do.
So that is something we are very actively, uh, looking at.
Mm-hmm.
Brilliant. Thank you very much.
Look, we are now going to move on
to the next item on our agenda, which is working
with Maori Iwi and Hapu
and the treaty settlement commitments.
And so we will start with our first question from Rachel
Brooking. Yeah, thank you.
Um, I, I've got a couple of questions,
but I noted on page 29 of your annual reports
that there's 3 million reduced from the URA fund.
And I was wondering if you could, um, tell us more about
what projects have lost their funding?
Um, that's my first question.
Um,
do that,
I will have a little bit on that.
So, uh, the, the purpose of that fund, uh, was to
help share and tell stories, uh,
and re reconnect, uh, whanau and hapu to, to land.
And so I can come back to you with specific projects,
but that was the, the purpose of the fund.
And look, we, we would probably say
that we are disappointed we had to lose it,
but, uh, overall we are able to, uh,
still invest in other types of storytelling,
uh, across sites.
And we've been asked to make budget savings
and, you know, across the entire department to do that.
Um, thank you. I've got a different primary, but,
and Madam Yes, please.
Um, yeah, I've got a, you, so it's really,
so understanding that the majority
of the treaty settlements have still yet to go, um,
just in terms of, so in terms of completeness.
So you've got 32% complete in terms of 30 settlements
and 54 plus yet to be completed.
So in light of that, my question is about
how does, how does DOC feel that it's going
to be able to complete those settlements with,
given all the changes, everything including, um,
stewardship, stewardship, land reviews, how is
that proposing to be able to complete
and undertake those responsibilities when it comes
to treaty settlements, including just those
still currently not completely.
So, so I'll, I'll start on that
and then hand to these two.
So I think the, a really critical thing, um,
is that in terms of every single government department,
doc has the most obligations
that have come out of treaty settlements.
Mm-hmm. So, uh, we have strategy obligations for 79
treaty settlements, and we currently have
around 3,451 commitments that we are reporting on.
Mm-hmm. And then we have about, um, I think it's 11,000
overall specific things that, that we have to do.
So when you look at the overall results of
how we are tracking, um, against what those obligations are,
I think we're actually doing pretty well.
Um, most of them are on track where there are some
that we haven't started quite often.
That's because the particular, um, iwi
that has settled isn't ready to work with us.
Mm-hmm. And so sometimes that, that will take, um,
a, a little bit of time.
Um, and then I think the really other key thing is in the
last year we had the office
of the Auditor General did an overall report on
how treaty settlement implementation, uh, was tracking.
It was an excellent report
and we are using it to really look through, um, in terms of
how our end-to-end treaty settlement system operates,
where are the places that we think that we can improve given
that we are, you know, getting close
to being pretty much in a post settlement world.
But I just wanna check in, is there anything you two
would want to add to that?
I mean, one thing I would say is that some of our, um,
some of our commitments will never be fully completed
because they are particularly in the space
of relationship agreements.
So how they're recorded here is in Teta
and we've given feedback
to the Mafi Select Committee on some
improvements that could be made.
Okay. Um, but yeah, some of ours will be ongoing.
If there's any further,
No, I was gonna wait at the same time.
Okay. And, and my apologies, I I'm happy to try
and drill down and be a little bit clearer.
It's about being able to guarantee
that those treaty settlements can be upheld as part
of the stewardship land reclassification process.
So that's going down into a specific part
of the treaty settlements in relation
to the stewardship land review process and whether
or what cultural analysis, um, the department is able to do
in the legislative space, um, on the impact
of government policy in relation to treaty settlements.
Yeah. Yep. Does that makes any sense?
Uh, I think there's two parts.
Yeah, there is to your question.
So one is about the impact
of the stewardship land review process
on treaty settlements.
Yeah. And so the, in terms
of the commitments made under the treaty settlement,
which is primarily the area that we are dealing with,
'cause it, it involves the west, east, south island.
Yep. There's no immediate impact on the, uh, um,
treaty settlement per se, because this Okay.
Uh, I'm struggling to think if there was any land
that was included in the settlement
that would've have been transferred already,
that would've still been
provided, you know, still been caught under the, the label
of stewardship land.
Okay. We, but to a broader point in terms of our broader,
you know, section four responsibilities with n Tahu,
you know, we have worked extremely close with ni firstly
with N Tahu through that whole reclassification Okay.
Process. So there's, there's quite a bit
of background I could give you about that, that mechanism.
And then the second part of the question, I think relates
to the impact of the Legisl legislative form Yes.
Reform that the Minister is
Promoting. That's right.
And its impact on treaties. Settlements.
Yep. Which I could answer now.
Yes. Yep. Thank you.
So we have, so we've got a good idea about what's going
to change in terms of the legislative reform.
And so what we,
and we've also got a very good idea about
what our treaty settlement commitments are.
Yep. So we've done a process of going
through every single settlement
and thinking about how all this legislative reform Okay.
Impact the different types of settlement redress.
'cause when you sort of boil it down, there's,
there's broad, you know, a, a smaller number of categories
of settlement redress, you know,
and some of that settlement redress, like for example,
an overlay classification or a deep well data recognition.
But, so those are forms of redress where it's,
it's relatively straightforward in the new environment to,
to make the reference that is there already
to say a conservation management strategy.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And you can change that reference
to being the new vehicle.
Okay. The new statutory document.
So that's more straightforward.
And then there are more complex forms that we'll have
to kind of work through.
So for example, some trees that would redress involves, um,
a ability to co-author Yep.
A conservation management strategy chapter.
So in those cases, we're gonna have to work, we, you know,
we have started a conversation with the iwi to say, look,
we think this reform will impact on your settlement redress
in terms of, um, the, the particulars of
what we've committed to.
We do think that there is a role that we can find in the new
environment that looks very much like what was committed to
and you in terms of its intent.
Yeah. And so we are working that through now in terms of
how we translate the existing redress into the
new redress,
You feel confident that you're going to be able
to uphold those commitments even in the new regime
and these sort of changes.
So, so from, you know, my point of view as a, a technician
and a, you know, a, a policy person,
someone's involved in Tree.
My my technical assessment is yes, you know, we've talked
to Iwi and in those conversations they're not, you know,
they're not as convinced yet,
but that's what we've gotta work
through with them. Yeah. Thank you.
So yeah, specifically on that, um, talking about Na Tahu
and obviously Pots of the Land is in their Hmm.
Um, what about the roles on board?
So like the, the Conservation Authority
and the regional conservation authorities?
I can so that, so we, um, had to be mindful of the fact
that there has been a statement
of claim lodged against the minister for this exercise.
And, and the focus of
that is very much on exactly this point is
how are we gonna translate?
Yeah. So, um, yeah, I don't wanna get into too much,
but we have been talking with Nhu about acknowledging
that there is an impact in terms of how that part of their,
as settlement operates.
And so, and we, you know,
have definitely been thinking about ways in which
that might translate into the new environment
and what it might take to, to sort of maintain the intent
of those arrangements.
'cause remember, yeah, there's,
I, I do remember, and I think, um,
it'll be a very difficult thing for you to be doing given
how fundamental the changes are to a system
that's been running for a long time now,
and it goes to ministerial control.
And is it, did you have a further question, Rachel?
Well, I, I'm, no, you said that there's a court case
and that you're doing some thinking,
Um, Priyanka. Yeah.
So just on your point of the work that you're doing
to, um, I guess
mitigate some of the potential impacts
and so on so forth, manage it, um, is that, does
that also include, given that the review of section four,
um, some of the concerns raised is around the narrowing of
that section and the fact that it settled with we
or some treaty treaty supplements have the right
to first refusal, right of first refusal that applies
to land that is sold,
but not necessarily land that is exchanged.
And that is an area of concern there as well.
Is there work underway, um, to address that
or is their thinking around what's thinking around
Yeah, no, definitely.
Yeah, no, we, we've thought hard about that.
Um, so yes, you're right.
Like technically we are, there is a transfer,
it doesn't trigger the RFR provisioning.
Mm-hmm. We are mindful though, in terms of the, you know,
the advice we've been giving that, um, you would,
you would wanna provide a mechanism
by which you could make some assessment
of the cultural value of that land.
And so how you think about that in the context about
what you might, um, when you are trying to figure out what,
which is what was proposed in the reform,
how you calculate a net conservation benefit.
So how does, and conservation is a broad construct.
It's not just about biodiversity, it's also about cultural
and recreational value.
So all those things can go into the mix when you are
weighing up what, what a net benefit looks like as well.
So if there is, you know, obviously very strong
cultural values, then how would you be, be able to calculate
or accommodate that in a, in a neat benefit calculation.
So yes, we are. Thank you. So
Just a couple more questions, uh,
Rachel, and then we'll go to Mar market.
Thank you. Yeah, thank you. And,
and that's jumping around a wee bit,
but related to treaty settlements
and pretty generally, um, with the thinking
that you're doing in terms of conservation Act reforms,
how much have you been involved
with the resource management reforms,
and particularly regarding settlements
or real issue we had last time round
with the natural built environments
act towards the settlements?
And I know there's more legislation about, um, that
the changes that this government is going to propose soon,
but is, is that a piece of work
that Conservation's been doing as well?
Or you focus more on the,
So it's like any policy process, uh, um, we will input
into work that, that others are leading.
So our, our team has been involved in that.
Um, in terms of leading the work on, um,
impact in terms of treaty settlements, um,
MFE is leading that under the Resource Management Act,
and the place where there's an overlap is in relation
to what's happening in the wildlife space linking to rm.
Um, Madam Ma, thank you. Is it just going, picking
Up on what Priyanka was talking about in terms
of right of first refusal?
'cause I'm just really interested in,
and I don't understand fully,
but will there be the situation of,
with the new rule of doc being able to put lands up
for purchase, where hypothetically
billionaire could come in
and purchase land that no longer has the rfr, the note,
the RFR can no longer apply, um,
where it would've ordinarily reply, uh, applied. Is that
No, the r the RFR applies
whenever there is a disposal of the land.
Yes. So that, that won't change.
That won't change. No.
And if there is a transfer of land, the RFR mechanism
will go with the, with the transfer.
Yes. Because, yeah.
Okay. So that won't change. No.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
Look, we are going to move on
to the next item now on the structured agenda, uh,
to information and research,
which we have already touched on a little bit, um,
around addressing science research and data needs
and prioritize, uh, with some of the research funding.
So we'll now open it up for our questions around this area.
If any members have any questions on the innovation
technology and research.
Um, Priyanka I,
Not the challenge just trying to find, but it was like
Familiar around the, um, AI predator tools,
um, bit,
and I was just keen to know what sort of evidence,
um, base there
Was for that AI level predator default.
Yeah,
So we are using, um, AI in a lot of areas,
and you do have to train it.
So, um, you know, you build your algorithms,
but I've seen my team sitting there, you know, they check
that it's actually doing, you know, the right thing.
So we, we use it, um, uh, for monitoring, um,
PEs and species in real time.
Uh, but we also, the other area that we're using it
for in the predator space, which is critically important,
is using it more real time
to predict when we're gonna have beach mast events.
So we use satellite imagery, a whole lot of things.
And so we need to ground truth on the ground at the moment.
So if we think that's a ground karma, he is it a karma?
He, and over time you've gotta keep training it
to get better, but it means
that we are getting a lot more sophisticated
of when we're having a big beach master event that we know
with more certainty that that's about to happen.
And so, um, there's a whole lot of different ways
that we're using, um, AI and the pest management space.
So detecting invasions and that kind of thing,
but also, yeah, that predictive ability. Is there
Anything you'd add, Tim?
It's just saving a significant amount of time
where it's aggregating data.
So for example, you'll have a camera
and it will picture something,
and at times it may picture that wrong,
but it will always, we're showing,
it's always picking up something up with confidence,
which then means we can go in and look at that
and understand it and then make a plan.
And so sometimes it gets the identification wrong,
but each, um, kind of meeting
or instance of, um,
that particular species, it's general, that's,
It gets better. Yeah. So that's
where the training thing comes in.
Um, would then, I mean with, with something like AI
or anything in that space,
there's always the pros and the cons.
There's always some, some risks
or potential risks associated with it as well.
Hmm. What are, what are some of the potential risks
that you might have identified with this?
So I think we still, we still need people.
I think sometimes people think that, um,
we're gonna AI ourselves outta the biodiversity crisis.
But, you know, there's still a lot of, um,
And everything else, everything,
Robots, including Mps,
But yeah, so there's, there is that ground tree thing,
but there also, if you look at, we have a team,
a monitoring team that go out into the back country.
So yes, there's camera networks, yes, there's satellites,
but they've rediscovered species in places we didn't expect
to have them, uh, including lichens,
which I also really care about.
Um, so there's things that you can do on the ground
and changes you see in the environment
and the way you collect data, that is still gonna be, uh,
something that for now AI's not gonna do,
but it all means it helps, as Tim says it, it leads to
an efficiency, uh, in that system.
And so I think it's how we manage it responsibly
that you're doing that checking as you go
and you're making sure, um, yeah,
that ground truthing against.
Is there anything you'd add, Tim?
No, that's fine. Um, just final question on that.
Have you got a sense of how, how, so how use this in terms
of using AI for predicate?
How long has DOC been using?
So in terms of camera technology, we've been using it
for a good few years now.
Remote sensing in general and, and,
and using different ways of picking up things in the
environment has been around for a while.
I think one of the game changers is
it's just like all technology, the extent to which you need
to change batteries, do you download manually, kind
of upload via, you know, satellites.
And so everything just gets better in terms of
that efficiency side of it more.
But there's, we've been using it for a wee while now, so
Then you probably have enough time to have worked out
some sense of a cost benefit analysis there.
What, um, what are you finding in terms of the cost savings
of using AI to complement work on the ground?
Um, I did have some data somewhere in my book,
but, so one of the areas,
If you like, One of the areas I think that we've,
it's really helped us is when we get an island incursion.
So we've got over 300 islands free of mammalian predators,
but some, as you know, are within swimming distance.
Mm-hmm. In the past we used traps all around the island.
So once you've got one, you then just had
to lay a lot more traps.
But there's just something more dynamic.
So it's enable, it means
that we can respond way more quickly when we have that kind
of camera technology laid out
and then pick up if there's any others.
So that's one area where it can drop the
cost pretty significantly of getting on top
of a problem pretty quick.
Okay. Yeah, if you do have some
Of those figures, I'd be Really interested.
Yeah, I did have something on island
eradication stuff I can committee.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. Clia
A different area of data collection.
I'm really interested in how.works with some
of the complexities of citizen science
and what different teams are doing and what aggregation.
You've got EDNA, iNaturalist, um,
Carou Counts, rural Accounts, garden Bird surveys,
and, and look, the, the nature of citizen science is
that it's not a hundred percent accurate,
but it should give you trends and so on.
So what, which of those things are you looking at
and are you encouraging people, oh, trap,
NZ don't never forget Trap NZ, um, what,
how are you encouraging the public to use those?
And maybe the nurturing could include taking
your phone with you occasionally? Yeah,
So I'm gonna mention one thing that, uh,
our team's super proud of and you know, Tim
and Sam might have some stuff to add,
but one
of the things we are really excited is we are building a
smart weed app.
So lots of people use iNaturalist, they go out, they,
you know, search up all sorts of things.
One of the best things we can do with Weeds,
which is an area we need to do a lot more on in New Zealand,
is finding it really early
is one of the most critical things.
Yes. So, um, our teams have been working
with a tech provider to come up with an app
where you can scan what you think might be a new weed
to an area, it immediately uploads it to iNaturalist texts,
and then you can alert a council
or if you're a land manager. So
INaturalist meets fixing.
Yeah, yeah. It's, yeah. And so it just means
that you can actually act quickly
and get ahead of something.
And so we really wanna push that out so that if you think,
whether you are a Hunter or a bird watcher
or whatever, if you're out there
and you think, what is that?
It tells you whether, um, it's a weed, it means
that people can respond.
But, um, we've certainly been thinking about it in the
predator free context too,
because I think, you know, we have thousands of, um,
sites out there that we are going to monitor,
but we need to have the right level of monitoring
for people in communities and bird counts.
So, uh, you'll know from Predator Free Wellington, all
of those kind of communities, um, do such cool,
get such cool information
to tell them about what's happening in their backyard.
So I think how we share that knowledge across is really
And aggregated.
Yeah.
Yeah. Just very encouraging of, um, citizen science.
And I think the main thing comes down to like,
there are different levels of confidence you need depending
on whether you're trying to understand state
trend or effectiveness.
And in many cases, citizen Science provides us
that starting point for what we need to then jump in
and investigate further as,
So is there someone within Dock keeping a watching brief
on all of the EDNA sites, for example?
Yeah, so our freshwater team do a lot
to coordinate our EDNA work, but, um,
and we also have our monitoring
and insights team who we are working
to build a better system
and we're putting in a new, um, biodiversity data system
because we have so much data, we do want
to get a better system to, you know, collect it all up
and then you can draw insights out
of it more once you get that picture.
So, um, like many things, uh,
with still a bit too much on spreadsheets, so we are trying
to put in a system that enables us to do that more easily.
Yeah, I mean,
and you know, we do also work with a lot of people.
You know, we develop our,
we make our own little bad acoustic recorders so
that people can, you know, monitor
for bats in their backyard.
I, you know, I think there's lots of things like that
that you can engage New Zealanders on as well.
Thank you. Look, we are gonna keep moving on the agenda
because we have a few more items to cover before we finish.
Mm-hmm. So, um, we're gonna move
to the funding arrangements, uh, in particular Jobs
for Nature and Bio Invest,
which I'd be keen to talk about.
So, uh, even though some
of these areas have been touched on, uh,
members may have further questions
in relation to these topics.
So I'll open up for any questions relating
to these pre anchor.
I have questions on both and Bio Invests.
I'll start with Bio Invests though,
and again, echoing, I think it was Celia who's
who thanked you for the briefing that we got on Bio Invests
that, um, just really interested in, um,
the, um, the fact that part of
what it will do, what Buyin invests will do is
to help identify specific activities as, um, as lower value
that could then be scaled back or stopped.
There's a piece in there that mentions this, um, what,
what specific activities?
I mean, it's all, it's a tool that's already been used, so
what are those activities?
So, um, I'll let Tim jump up as well.
Like, there's, there's more work in there than,
than we could do.
So sometimes scaling up
or stopping is that there's a community group who want
to pick it up and part of what's bio might be the recipe of
how to go about doing it.
So, or it might be that we can partner
with someone else to, to do the work.
So, um, yeah, it's not always necessarily stopping.
It may be that we just think differently about
how we deliver different pieces of work.
So, sorry. You,
I think what's really surprised me
and the team when we've, um, undertaken Bio Invest,
it's really reinforced that there isn't a lot value work.
All of the work is making a difference species
and ecosystems systems.
The issue is around whether that is adding to the types
of species and ecosystems that we're looking after
and the threats that we are managing, um,
and how urgent those species or ecosystems are.
So there may be work that is potentially a lower priority
because we're already looking
after a number of South Island beach forest, for example.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. So there could be a question about, Hey,
do you look after a coastal Dun system
that we're currently not looking after in Northland
or in Rocky or, or do we look after another forest type?
That's what we're already looking at.
So it's identifying where we have kind of
more effort compared to other areas, um,
of lower authority rather than lower value.
Well, that's interesting because your response
to questions 27 specifically mentions lower value
activities, but now you're saying that that's not the frame
that you are using.
So I would like some clarity there
and if, given that you've said
to support the shift doc is identifying lower value
activities that could be scaled back or seized.
So Stephanie's response, I, I can understand that it,
it could be lower value to doc if someone else is doing it
better, for example, and then it kind
of makes sense from a biodiversity point of view
to perhaps scale back.
I don't know, maybe. Yeah, so a big keen,
I think, I think the tricky thing is, um, for a lot
of our species and ecosystems,
we are basically saying we can't necessarily afford to look
after them in every place that they are.
Mm-hmm. So if you are looking
after a certain thing in 27 space place and one thing,
and none, you would say
that actually taking a couple off there to work on
that would be lower value to keep doing all of those than,
so we're saying it's not that it's low, it doesn't matter,
it's just that it's helping us make some choices.
I, I understand that, and I'm not necessarily,
It's probably just the language against it,
But there's surely there's some criteria that would Yes.
Um, that would wrap around
or guide decisions around what is perceived.
So you'd have guardrails, like what you've just mentioned,
could be one of them, but surely I'm asking what are,
what are those guardrails?
So it's things like, we want to look
after a representative range of ecosystems,
and we've got a whole lot of criteria
around what that looks like.
And in some cases we are not doing enough for some
of those ecosystem types, so we might have to do less
of one where we're doing more.
So the, within each program,
there are definitely criteria. Um, and
That's, that is defined.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
Um, what would the waiting be between, um,
ecological value versus efficiency?
Do you want to, um, so a lot of this is built around
what it would take to get a species or ecosystem to systems.
What we look at too, though, is, so for some things
where we know we are likely to partner
with someone like the next foundation like we do with a lot
of our predator work, that helps us make a choice that
that's a good investment to do that over there.
But it's not a, it doesn't make the decision for us.
We have to actually look at a lot of the waitings
and make, make judgment calls working
with our regional operation colleagues as well.
Yeah. And we do have to balance up different outcomes
that we are trying to make decisions on. So
The main criteria that we look at is effectiveness.
So the likelihood of achieving the outcome, the difference
between doing that work
and not doing the work on the species or the ecosystem.
Yeah. Um, the representation
or the genetic variability, like
how we are already looking after thing.
And then lastly, the costs of achieving the outcome.
And so if we are partnering with others, for example,
looking after with fuel foundation
and mountains, that really reduces the costs of the outcome
of looking after that aka population, which
increases the priority of us, um, funding
because the cost per outcome reduces.
So it step noted for each biodiversity program,
we have different criteria.
Just two more steps on this very quickly, two more.
Um, although every time I hear T Han Emergency Mountain,
I think I'm on a flight, but
You Another site because it combined with the, take
That aside, given that it's been largely a judgment call.
So the tool gives you the information
to make a judgment call as to where money is best served,
who makes that ultimate decision?
So the team, uh, comes to the senior leadership team
and they present some scenarios with a recommendation
because we've got a lot of technical
expertise in the department.
So, for example, um, we have waited a lot of our decisions
to avoiding, uh, irreversible and imminent loss.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Um,
and so we make sure that, um, we're putting enough in that
to avoid that, but, um,
we could spend our entire biodiversity
budget on Wild and Conifers.
So we wouldn't recommend doing that
because you've gotta do a spread across everything.
So the team come at that, um, that kind of thematic level
to the senior leadership team, take us through
what we should weigh up
and, um, on the recommendation of a bunch
of directors give us a recommendation and we make a call.
So, um, it helps us really get a good understanding of
what some of those trade-offs are.
And I think the, the other thing that it's done is
for each of our regional directors, they, they now
have a cut for their region so that they can see, you know,
what, what's going on in their particular place.
So it, it's not perfect,
but it's a hell of a lot better than
what we've had in the past to work out how to prioritize
where, where we put our money. Yeah,
Sure. My last
question then is in the, in the event
that the decision is made
that someone else is doing it better
and you don't wanna duplicate that work
and dot scales back on a particular project,
how do you monitor that?
Um, effectiveness?
So we still wanna capture that information where we can.
And, um, one of the actions in the next, uh,
implementation plan for A-N-Z-B-S is to try
and start getting a more of a national picture across all
of the activity.
But there is, yeah, there's a lot
where we still wanna capture in the system, like the work
of Save the Kiwi and a whole lot of other groups.
We are still getting a sense of
what we are doing for that species.
And we, Even if work's been done by others,
we'll still capture it in bio invests
and the monitoring component.
If it's more efficient to be undertaken by the department
because it can fit within our monitoring program, it will be
Okay. Thanks. Thank
you. Um, look,
did you have a question on this particular topic? No,
It's Jobs, furniture. Okay.
Jobs for Nature.
So we'll just take one more question on this area
before we have to move on.
So
Next one. Yeah,
that's right. But it's all incorporated Jobs
for Nature's the same area.
Oh, okay. I can go now. Yes. Yeah, go. Sweet. Thank you.
Okay. Jobs for Nature.
Um, but there's, there's a related conversation from
what Priyanka
and others picked up in terms of do you, do you get to just
value nature for the sake of nature,
not just within the confines of
fiscal returns on investment, for example.
So picking up on Jobs for Nature,
was there an independent review
and independent review conducted on
those dot funded projects
and the outcomes that also took into account not just
economical fiscal, but social cultural,
the broader connections made.
I've traveled the country hearing incredible things from
Ranga Tahi reconnecting to MAGA Maori
and leading, leading out these projects of entire
hillsides saved and clean water rivers saved,
but for the funding cliff to then waste years of work.
And that we see the weeds returning, we see, um,
the protections dissipating.
So was there independent research and evaluation done,
and what were some of those highlights
from the work of Jobs for Nature?
Yes. Um, so we've got some initial findings.
So obviously this is a $485 million program over five years
was always time limited,
and we were really clear about that.
So our criteria for all projects, um, included
how you could sustain the project ongoing.
So I think it was really important.
Um, and probably it's worth noting that about 90%
of projects reported that they would continue to, um, to,
you know, to continue to get gains and do the work.
Um, it was an employment, uh,
program primarily with benefits to nature.
So a lot of the benefits that we have seen Yes.
Have been, um, related in terms
of particularly young coming back to the Yeah.
And getting connected with nature and,
and feeling like they have a part, a role to play.
Um, we have seen, uh, obviously a lot of good, um, outcomes
for conservation and that's been fantastic for us
to see social improvements.
We, we have been able to work with community groups
and iwi in a way that, you know, at a scale
that we hadn't done nearly half a billion dollars,
it really unleashed an awful lot.
So the Ministry for Environment will do the final
evaluation report.
Okay. So the funding has finished,
but we're still closing out some the projects.
We've still got 20 projects we are working with, um,
and others, uh, are still going for other agencies.
We will do a final, um, benefits and evaluation report.
Um, but also it's probably worth noting it's been a cost
benefit ratio of essentially for every dollar put in,
we get $4 back.
And that's in social economic and other outcomes. Fantastic.
So not an independent review, but a
but an administrative of environment review will
help pull us out for that.
Yes. And yes. My, my question was going
to be about the estimated return on investment.
Will that review clearly step us through the sorts
of returns including social, um,
and uh, uh, yeah, I believe so.
It's probably worth mentioning too, some
of these projects have continued on, like out
of nursery in Canterbury.
Mm-hmm. What did they get?
2.7 million, almost like a seed funding. Mm-hmm.
We changed our mindset to go from funder to investor,
which is quite a different way of working with these, um,
projects to say, we are not there just handing out money
and good luck on you go
and you probably need to come back from more money.
We've actually worked alongside them. Partnership.
Partnership. They have looked, they have trained people,
they've, yeah, they have, you know, they've,
they've really upskilled themselves and their organizations
and then we've, then they have attracted other funding, yes.
Other partnerships, whether it's councils,
philanthropic donations, a whole range.
So for many of them, they actually going on
to be commercial entities in their own right
or finding up various ways to continue, albeit some
of them at a reduced level.
Um, but yeah, I think it's a pretty outstanding result
for a lot of those projects.
They don't need us in their world forever as doc aware
of some of the, an, uh, not anecdotal,
actual stories coming out.
For example, we are, as you say, a lot of man
and iwi pu groups have been leading a lot of the work
where it has actually restored Maori
and non Maori relationships
where people have been working together to restore wetlands,
for example, to restore rivers.
Ha has those stories come through back to you as the agency?
Yes, they have.
And I like you, um, a lot of us have been out on the ground
and, and seen that, and it, it's been really special.
Great. Brilliant. Thank You. Thank you very much.
Uh, look, we are going to move on.
Um, and we are going to move on to the next area.
Um, and Rachel Brooking has, uh, Christian or two, yeah,
We Need to leave. I'm, I'm
running away in a minute,
but, so just one first que and I very quick questions.
Um, so changes to the Wildlife Act,
have you done any monitoring of how that's working?
Yes. No, that's right. No,
So we've certainly got the numbers of, um,
how many applications we've processed since the changes
and you know, there's over 300 of them relate to
Translocations and research and, and things like that.
And then, um, there've been, um, a number related
to more in that development sector.
So we've been working through,
so there's been about 28 decisions on construction
and property for 18 and transport number structure. And so,
And the question is, are you monitoring
how it, is it working?
So yeah, quite often with how it's working or in
Any, any concession decision, there will be conditions,
um, that those, uh, applicants will have to meet, uh,
as part of that application.
So we will have conditions that we monitor as part of that
As more if you are monitoring the system changes
from that amendment.
It doesn't sound like you are
No, in terms of, I mean,
'cause the, the act just enabled us essentially to,
to do something which we was our practice.
That's right. And it confirmed the, the legal standing
of that practice.
So in that sense, we haven't really, I mean my line,
we haven't significantly changed how we do things. So the,
The normal. Okay. Okay. Thank,
um, second question.
Sorry, um, ha have oceans been defunded And I asked that,
'cause I know that page 28 of the annual review,
6.9 million was returned from the ocean actuaries.
And we see as well that the at risk marine mammals, uh,
there were 10 in 2019
and that's increased to 14 in 2024.
So that DIC money did go back.
But in terms of the Raki golf, um, work going through,
we had, um, investment that went with that to, um,
and I think we're, we've been able to recruit, uh,
I think it's about 32 people
to be involved in marine reserve protection.
So that's been retained and is being rolled out.
And the money that, uh, we received
for the Southeastern Marine Protection Reserve,
that's just continuing to roll over
and IPS until the court cases through.
And we still have our marine scientists,
marine technical people, marine rangers, you
Know, and the court. So that
court case is still ongoing this mm-hmm. Yep.
Yeah. And do you, in terms of the hierarchy golf then,
um, I, we were lucky as a select committee to go out on one
of your boats for a visit,
and I think the doc has two boats.
Do you think that's gonna be enough for enforcement?
So look, um, we we're keeping in touch
with the, the team on that.
The, the excitement amongst our people as um,
those reserves came in was just enormous.
And so they're really focused at the moment on, um,
education, ensuring people know what, what to do.
Um, and over time we'll get clearer on whether
we've got enough for enforcement.
Okay. So we'll ask again. Yes. That's,
That's really, uh, promising to hear.
Look, we are on the final, uh, two items at the moment.
So, uh, modernizing the regulatory system
and building efficiency and ocean conservation
as Rachel has already, uh, touched on.
But I look, just want to just flip back to Cameron Luxton
who did have a question around the jobs for nature
that you weren't able to ask. Um, no, I was
Just gonna ask, um, we've just heard
some conflicting answers.
Uh, not all Madama Davidson, uh,
in her opening question made the point that, uh, a whole lot
of these projects that were established from Jobs
for Nature have fallen over and weeds
and pests have taken over.
But then in your answer you said, uh, vin's answer that
the projects weren't being chosen
unless they had a long term future in mind, which one
of those is, is actually the case.
So I think the, when that investment came in
through COVID, it was always very clear that it was,
it was time limited
and that there wouldn't be ongoing investment
and that, um, they were to get outcomes up at the time.
And, um, that the intention was, you know, as many
of them would keep going as possible,
but there wasn't a commitment to do that.
Um, I think c will have the stats on
how many have actually, um, kept going,
Well as, as I say, 90% reported to us that they were able
to and would continue. Um, is
That at the start of the process at the end?
That's various different stages
'cause they came on over at different periods.
Um, we continue to work with a number of projects,
including not just the 20 we've finished with,
but we've worked with various to help them connect them
with other sources of funding to help 'em get ready to,
you know, I, how to um, uh, apply
for grants and that sort of thing.
So there's all of that. But there's quite a,
there's quite a range of projects here too.
So some of the projects, you know,
so something like riparian planting could almost have a ring
around it, you know, so that's a thing that gets done that,
that, that nature then takes care of it itself.
So, so you would not expect there to be a widespread issue
with, uh, projects that have been invested in
and done, uh, falling over and becoming weed PE invested?
I mean we, that would be a failure in the program if we
To be the case. Well,
I mean, it couldn't guarantee it,
but we've worked really, really hard with projects
to help them get to the point, you know, so
that they're able to continue.
And, and, um, what I'm saying is that many of them have,
yeah, um, there, there will be some who will have seen it
as a, um, you know, will, will be disappointed that, that
that funding has has ended. Mm-hmm.
Look, thank you for clarifying, um, those outcomes
and obviously some of the good outcomes that we've seen
through the jobs of nature and transitioning, um, through,
look, we are gonna move on to the last item
around ocean conservation.
Yeah. And modernizing
Regulators. Yes, that's right. We're
going to wrap them up both into
the same area, which is, uh, what I had said earlier.
So, uh, we'll now take questions on these last two
items on the agenda.
So, uh, we will start with Priyanka,
She said about 20.
When you get to opposition, you can have all,
so just, I just had one question on,
and this is a question that there's a fair, been a fair bit
of commentary in the media around this.
And it's basically, um, I just wanna know
how will the changes or the proposed changes
to the Conservation Act
to unleash growth on conservation land,
which looks at potentially selling
or exchanging 60% of these public cons conservation land
and shifting decision making away from the conservation
authority and conservation to the minister, how will
that improve Conservation act?
That's all.
So the, the intent of the changes to the Conservation
Act, uh, to make it simpler, to make some,
to make decisions
for economic activity on public conservation land.
So at, at the moment, um, we are having
ev every application
to do something on public conservation land.
We, we are treating it separately.
Um, there's a, a large volume of planning documents that,
that we have to go through.
So part of the changes that we're, you know,
what we're trying to achieve is get really clear where, um,
there are a range of activities
that have little impact on conservation land
that they can just go through.
And then the things that have a higher impact, that's
where we put our time and effort.
So it's trying to streamline
and simplify, um, you know, how, how that operates.
That's the, the overall intent.
Yeah, but wouldn't,
but the, the, the, the proposal is also
to shift the decision maker.
So if you, I mean that, that, that's reasonable.
No one's going to, you know, rail against the fact
that if there's minimal impact on conservation,
then you shouldn't be able to do it.
But it's more who makes that decision
and where does that, that line lie in terms
of minimal conservation impact.
So in terms of the, so the, the changes do shift that
to the minister and they, it continues
to have input from conservation boards
and the conservation authority?
Yeah, I mean there's, I think there's two layers
of decision making you are talking about.
So there's the decision, the things that is changing,
there's the decision making around statutory documents
and in fact the number of statutory documents that we have.
So in that, in that sense, we are expecting that
that will make that, um, system a bit more efficient
because you are consolidating documents which currently are,
can be at odds with each other,
which makes decision making at a lower level a bit tricky
because you're trying
to in interpret which is the document I need
to give more weight to.
And so we are, how we thinking of that is that we are sort
of bringing this conservation system more in line
with other normal regulatory systems
where you do have the minister as being the
ultimate sign off of the regulations
that affect the activity that, you know,
or the, the direction
And the parameters in which the system operates. Okay,
Thank you. Look, we have got
other questions,
so we are gonna have to keep moving.
So, um, look, we'll go to Grant McCullum. Right. And
I've got a couple questions please on this.
Um, this is the sort of the whole concession
type discussion, right?
There's one thing that really, uh, gets, um, I get a lot of,
um, feedback into my office about is the whole concession
process, the time it takes, um, um, and the, and, and,
and it just seems to be one
of those things that's been never ending.
And uh, this is the area that what, so
what are you specifically doing to actually make
that more efficien efficient?
And so we get better
and faster outcomes for the, uh, applicants.
So there's been a huge amount of work that has been done,
um, over the last year in this space.
We have halved, um, the, you know, number
of concessions that we've got in the system.
We've cleared the backlog.
Um, we've met all the targets that the minister has set.
In fact we're exceeding them
and we are also investing in technology.
So that, uh, over time the experience that customers have
as they come into us, uh, to, with their applications,
it'll be a much easier experience.
Very much like we've done with the visitor, um,
booking system and the hunting permits.
It's the next off the blocks.
And just to, What Would
you add? Uh, I was just
gonna, just to give you a sense of scale.
So, um, five years prior to February, 2025,
we were clearing about 170 concessions a month.
Um, and we were getting over several hundred
in, so we weren't keeping up.
So we got a backlog.
In the past 10 months, we've been clearing 290 a month.
So at its worth the peak of the backlog was 1300.
We're now down to five 20 in the new year.
We think the equilibrium will be in that 3 5400 camp.
'cause it's, they take time to process.
But we have, yeah, half the time in, um,
clearing some things.
And also, um, you know, for some, uh, priorities
of this government, a hundred percent
of mining has been decided within six months.
And last year that was 55%.
So, um, there's a lot
of huge effort gone into really speeding up the process.
The next big game changer will be having an IT system
that we have more things like the hunting permit that go
through a process really quickly.
It's all online and we can put dedicated effort
and we've done all of that at the time, same time
as picking up fast track as well.
So super proud of our teams
And Cameron has a supplementary
Okay, thank you. Um,
my supplementary was about it, it to do
with these concession issues.
Um, I've had, uh, constituents tell me that they have tried
to engage with the local ranger
who oversees their concession, um,
and they can't get information back in regards
to things like the overlay on mappings being clear enough on
where their concession boundaries are.
You think that'd be something
that'd be sort out really quick.
What sort of, uh, concession partner,
business partner really is Doc?
Um, another issue since, I'll just ask this last one
and then leave it, but the other issue is, um,
some concessions have, uh,
his historic items like buildings or fences.
I've had a a constituent tell me
and show me a historic fence
with the wire lying in the ground.
They're not allowed to repair it
because it's class as historic.
I mean, what is doc doing
to pick alongside concession holders
and make sure that they can actually use the concession
properly and when the bespoke issue comes up,
they can actually work together and solve it.
Yeah. And so it's been, it's been very manual
for everybody, which is why we are fixing the system.
And link to that is we've just done a massive upgrade
to our geospatial platform.
So that's gonna make a significant difference
as we build this new, uh, modern regulatory system
that is gonna be a lot more use of friendly for rangers
and for others to see spatially, um, you know,
boundaries, all of that kind of stuff.
So that, so improvements are coming on that.
Um, and yeah, look, if there's particular heritage aspects
that we need to look at, we're very happy
to be contacted about that and have a look at that.
But there is, there is a heritage role that we have as well.
This point that I'm making, the heritage is an,
the heritage fence is an example of a real issue that I,
to be honest, I don't think it's
gonna be solved by technology.
Make this, sure it's gonna be solved
by a ranger on the ground saying, you know what,
that would be insane for me not to let you do it.
Um, which makes me think it's a little bit
insane that they're not allowed to do it.
So what sort of, what are you doing to enable rangers
or local, uh, dock representatives to actually work
with concession holders to find solutions to these problems?
Yeah, I mean, Henry May have a view on some of this,
but we have, um, been doing a lot of work to lean into our,
our heritage work and get a much better understanding
of it across the country.
Um, and so yeah, I think that's an area we can pick up
and work on more, but Henry has no comments,
So I, I, so, so I'm just gonna pick this one up.
So I acknowledge
that our regulatory system has not been as
customer focused or as, um, effective as it needs to be.
There are three tranches to fixing it.
So the first one is we have had a huge effort
to clear the backlog, operate things faster,
and I, I actually think our,
our people have done a phenomenal job
to lift performance in the last year.
The second piece is that technology piece.
The third bit is legislative reform.
So part of the reason we are doing conservation law reform
is so that it's much clearer
that there are particular things that are just pre-approved.
You don't even have to come in for permission
and they go through, um,
and then we, we focus the effort where they have impact.
So I think once we get to that, a whole lot of those things
that, um, you know, you're,
you're getting complaints about will be much simpler
And there'll be more time. Yeah.
Having some tape sounds great.
Okay. Look, we've got time for one more question
and we'll take it from, oh, we love our
Oceans though.
Um, okay. Let's make it worthwhile.
Um, I'd really, I'd really like to highlight oceans.
I know we're at the end of our time,
but I guess in your annual report,
and I think you've also said today, you've highlighted today
how the, um, at risk marine mammal species has increased.
Um, and particularly for, um, your goal
for improving marine resilience for Maui dolphins,
migratory sea seabirds as a top priority.
And could you, could we have an idea of
how the department is working with Fisheries New Zealand
and NPI to tackle this issue together?
Mm-hmm. Yeah,
We're doing um, a huge amount of work with, uh, NPI, uh,
also with um, earth Sciences it was,
and um, the seafood industry themselves as well.
So we have a joint, like a research program
that we work through together.
Some of it is cost recovered from the industry. Okay.
So, um, so we have a conservation services program
and each year we consult on, uh,
recovering conservation services.
So, uh, we do research into a lot
of our most threatened seabirds.
We do a lot of research on working directly
with the fishing industry on
how do you sink your lines quicker, you know,
how do you manage different actions out the back
of your vessel to reduce the
likelihood of catching seabirds.
We do a lot internationally too
because of course our seabirds are getting
caught all around the world.
Um, a huge game changer for
what cap Tross will be getting Mokoka
Auckland Island eradicated.
'cause they can't breed almost
of the island because of pigs.
Hoon will be important.
Um, and, but there are,
and then we are also doing a lot of research on, um, uh,
toxo on Maori dolphin working with others as well in
that pathway from cats.
So we have a lot of research that we're trying to do
and we are also doing a lot of work to better understand
and map our marine biodiversity
and where our really important marine areas are
working with councils and others.
So there's a big research program there.
It is, it is tricky
because a lot
of these species have predators where they nest.
Um, we are seeing starvation incidents
and some animals, so the environment is changing.
We've got diseases we need to try
and manage people around breeding
sites so they're not disturbing.
So, um, we have really dedicated, uh, marine team.
We work really closely with NPI
around the different roles that we each play.
Um, and there is a lot of, um, you know,
cost recovered investment from the industry
as well as from the crown. Good.
Ken, look, thank you very much.
We are gonna have to wrap it up there.
We have met time and uh,
we've traversed a lot of areas today.
Uh, look, and we really appreciate all the work that you do
and your team across the country to
preserve our amazing environment.
And so we really do appreciate it.
So thank you and thank you for your time today.
Thank you. Could you just
Advise us of the Process, follow up questions.